about.md, before:

---
title: About
layout: navpost
---

Hello! I'm Chris Yin -- 29 years old and living in the Bay Area. Currently [investing](https://angel.co/chrisyin) in early stage startups and working on a few side projects. Prior, I was Director of Product Management at [Coupa](https://www.coupa.com), an enterprise SaaS company that [went public](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/coupa) at the end of 2016.

A little about myself -- I grew up in a small town in the Bay Area and moved down to San Diego to go to [UCSD](https://ucsd.edu/). While I was there I met some awesome people and ended up starting [Pathways](http://rady.ucsd.edu/ciid/pathways-ventures/), a group for entrepreneurs to hang out and [work](http://nextshark.com/ecoqube-how-this-startup-can-seriously-end-world-hunger/) [on](http://www.premedhq.com) [projects](http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20131030-net-lessons-for-worlds-poorest) [together](http://ivn.us/2012/12/08/locbit-young-ceo-amongst-citys-core-startups/).

After finshing up school, I helped start a [services firm](http://bespokepartners.com/) and joined my friend [Parand](https://twitter.com/parand) at his startup, [Xpenser](http://xpenser.com/). In 2013, we were [acquired by Coupa](http://www.xconomy.com/san-diego/2013/04/18/acquired-or-acq-hired-xpenser-adds-expertise-to-coupas-web-services/) and we joined to help them build out a new business unit. I ended up as lead PM for our [Expenses](https://venturebeat.com/2016/01/28/coupas-expense-management-solution-receives-highest-score-for-proficiency/), [Inventory](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/coupa-software-unveils-inventory-application-120000580.html), and [Mobile](https://www.paystreamadvisors.com/2015-paystream-innovate-award-winners-announced/) products.

I'm now investing in early stage companies statups and I'm an investor/advisor in [Elliot](https://www.helloiamelliot.com/), [Retool](https://retool.in/), [HiOperator](https://hioperator.com/), [Arternal](https://arternal.com/), [Bid Ops](http://www.bid-ops.com/), [ADI](https://getecoqube.com/), and [Ocean Hugger Foods](https://oceanhuggerfoods.com/). Always looking for great new people & startups to meet with, so [ping me](https://twitter.com/chriseyin/) anytime!

Thanks for stopping by!

--

<h6><i>Last updated: October 21st, 2017</i></h6>

Commit message:

updated index with reading and about with principles and codex vitate

about.md, after:

---
title: About
layout: navpost
---

Hello! I'm Chris Yin -- 29 years old and living in the Bay Area. Currently [investing](https://angel.co/chrisyin) in early stage startups and working on a few side projects. Prior, I was Director of Product Management at [Coupa](https://www.coupa.com), an enterprise SaaS company that [went public](https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/coupa) at the end of 2016.

A little about myself -- I grew up in a small town in the Bay Area and moved down to San Diego to go to [UCSD](https://ucsd.edu/). While I was there I met some awesome people and ended up starting [Pathways](http://rady.ucsd.edu/ciid/pathways-ventures/), a group for entrepreneurs to hang out and [work](http://nextshark.com/ecoqube-how-this-startup-can-seriously-end-world-hunger/) [on](http://www.premedhq.com) [projects](http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20131030-net-lessons-for-worlds-poorest) [together](http://ivn.us/2012/12/08/locbit-young-ceo-amongst-citys-core-startups/).

After finshing up school, I helped start a [services firm](http://bespokepartners.com/) and joined my friend [Parand](https://twitter.com/parand) at his startup, [Xpenser](http://xpenser.com/). In 2013, we were [acquired by Coupa](http://www.xconomy.com/san-diego/2013/04/18/acquired-or-acq-hired-xpenser-adds-expertise-to-coupas-web-services/) and we joined to help them build out a new business unit. I ended up as lead PM for our [Expenses](https://venturebeat.com/2016/01/28/coupas-expense-management-solution-receives-highest-score-for-proficiency/), [Inventory](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/coupa-software-unveils-inventory-application-120000580.html), and [Mobile](https://www.paystreamadvisors.com/2015-paystream-innovate-award-winners-announced/) products. I wrote down some [principles](/principles/) I try to live by and a more detailed [Codex Vitae](/codex-vitae/) you can also check out too.

I'm now investing in early stage companies statups and I'm an investor/advisor in [Elliot](https://www.helloiamelliot.com/), [Retool](https://retool.in/), [HiOperator](https://hioperator.com/), [Arternal](https://arternal.com/), [Bid Ops](http://www.bid-ops.com/), [ADI](https://getecoqube.com/), and [Ocean Hugger Foods](https://oceanhuggerfoods.com/). Always looking for great new people & startups to meet with, so [ping me](https://twitter.com/chriseyin/) anytime!

Thanks for stopping by!

--

<h6><i>Last updated: October 21st, 2017</i></h6>
