---
title: Anxiety
layout: post
tags: 
 - personal
 - founder
 - anxiety
 - thoughts
 - reflection
 - writing
---

We're a few days into 2018 and most of the people in my world are back to work. Meanwhile, I'm currently in Taiwan visiting relatives and family, which doesn't leave me a whole lot of time to work. I've got several projects running concurrently and I'm a behind on a few of them. I have some upcoming changes to my life that I need to adjust to, some new questions that I need to dig into, and my personal life is growing more complex. Quite a bit going on. 

All of this leaves me with a perpetual feeling of anxiety hanging over my head. It's building up to a point where it's almost unbearable, so I decided to do a bit of writing to clear my mind. I wrote down a short list of all the topics I had on my mind. 

Just doing that alone helped. It reminded me that a few of the areas I was stressing about were actually the same thing but from different angles. Some were really not that important. And it also reminded that the list of things I had to worry about wasn't *that* long. It's been worse :sunglasses:. 

Then I quickly went through each one and wrote a bit on each. I laid out the current situation / context, what I'm feeling & why, and what I'm going to do about it. This also had the same soothing effect. 

For some of the items, it became pretty clear that there was no need for anxiety at all. The path forward was pretty clear, and all I needed to do was keep trodding down that path until I hit the next fork in the road. Nothing to be anxious about there. 

For the other items, writing it out helped me see why I was actually feeling anxious. It was a mixture of being in the early phases of building new skills as well as just general anxiety about the future. In both cases, anxiety is a normal part of the process and it would never go away. Recognizing that on its own helped me get comfortable and allowed me to shed the uneasiness I was feeling. 

A lot of us suffer from anxiety at times. This exercise helped me realize that anxiety can be based on false pretenses. By exploring why we're feeling anxious, we can tease out the true nature of what we're feeling anxious about and relieve the pressure. 