---
title: 7 Powers - The Foundations of Business Strategy
category: reading
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Hamilton Helmer
layout: bookpost
tags:
- booknotes
---

>  Strategy: the study of the fundamental determinants of potential business value

>  Following a line of reasoning common in Economics, Strategy can be usefully separated into two topics: Statics—i.e. “Being There”: what makes Intel’s microprocessor business so durably valuable? Dynamics—i.e. “Getting There”: what developments yielded this attractive state of affairs in the first place? These two form the core of the discipline of Strategy,

>  Power: the set of conditions creating the potential for persistent differential returns

>  strategy: a route to continuing Power in significant markets

>  I refer to this as the Fundamental Equation of Strategy.

>  Dual Attributes . Power is as hard to achieve as it is important. As stated above, its defining feature ex post is persistent differential returns. Accordingly, we must associate it with both magnitude and duration . Benefit. The conditions created by Power must materially augment cash flow, and this is the magnitude aspect of our dual attributes. It can manifest as any combination of increased prices, reduced costs and/or lessened investment needs. Barrier. The Benefit must not only augment cash flow, but it must persist, too.

>  The Benefit conditions probably won’t sound all too rare—they are met often in business. Indeed, every major cost-cutting initiative qualifies. The Barrier conditions, on the other hand, prove far rarer, a reality that merely proves the ubiquity of competitive arbitrage. As a strategist, then, my advice is, “Always look to the Barrier first.”

>  Here let’s define Scale Economies: A business in which per unit cost declines as production volume increases.

>  Beyond fixed costs, Scale Economies emerge from other sources as well. To name a few: Volume/area relationships. These occur when production costs are closely tied to area, while their utility is tied to volume, resulting in lower per-volume costs with increasing scale. Bulk milk tanks and warehouses would serve as examples. Distribution network density. As the density of a distribution network increases to accommodate more customers per area, delivery costs decline as more economical route structures can be accommodated. A new entrant competitor to UPS would face this difficulty. Learning economies. If learning leads to a benefit (reduced cost or improved deliverables) and is positively correlated with production levels, then a scale advantage accrues to the leader. Purchasing economies. A larger scale buyer can often elicit better pricing for inputs. For example, this has helped Wal-Mart.

>  Surplus Leader Margin (SLM). This is the profit margin the business with Power can expect to achieve if pricing is such that its competitor’s profits are zero.

>  Network Economies occur when the value of a product to a customer is increased by the use of the product by others.

>  In Vanguard’s case, their business model resulted in substantially lower costs (the elimination of expensive portfolio managers, as well as the reduction of channel costs and unnecessary trading costs) which then translated into superior product deliverables (higher average net returns).

>  This allows me to define Counter-Positioning: A newcomer adopts a new, superior business model which the incumbent does not mimic due to anticipated damage to their existing business.

>  The incumbent has little prospect for Power in this new business: either the industry economics support no Power (a commodity), or the incumbent’s competitive position is such that attainment of Power is unlikely. Kodak’s formidable strengths had little relevance to semiconductor memory, and those new products were on an inevitable path to commodization.

>  However, the impact of entry into passive funds on their remaining base business of active funds would have been subtractive. Active funds carry radically higher expense charges and many even had upfront sales commissions (loads). For the assets they would have cannibalized, the revenue decline would have been dramatic.

>  What are the potential causes of such decrements? They could be numerous, but over several decades of client strategy work, I have noted two that seem common. The first involves two characterisitics of challenges to incumbency: 1. The challenger’s approach is novel and, at first, unproven. As a consquence, it is shrouded in uncertainty, especially to those looking in from the outside. The low signal-to-noise of the situation only heightens that uncertainty. 2. The incumbent has a successful business model. This heritage is influential and deeply embedded, as suggested by Nelson and Winter’s 30 notion of “routines,” and with it comes a certain view of how the world works. The CEO probably can’t help but view circumstances through this lens, at least in part.

>  In the face of low-cost passive funds, Ned Johnson of Fidelity once famously inquired, “Why would anyone settle for average returns?”

>  There’s a second source of decrement that can lead our CEO to reject an objectively attractive investment decision: the differences between the objective of the firm (maximum value) and that of the CEO, or other investment decision-makers.

>  the finalized chart indicates, there are three varieties of Counter-Positioning, depending on the particulars of the collateral damage involved: Milk, History’s Slave and Job Security.

>  I whimsically refer to it as the Five Stages of Counter-Positioning: Denial Ridicule Fear Anger Capitulation (frequently too late)

>  The only bet worthwhile for a challenger is one in which even if the incumbent plays its best game, it can be taken off the board. A competent Counter-Positioned challenger must take advantage of the strengths of the incumbent, as it is this strength which molds the Barrier, collateral damage.

>  This benefit only accrues to the Power holder in selling follow-on products to their current customers; they hold no Benefit with potential customers and there is no Benefit if there are no follow-on products.

>  Barrier. To offer an equivalent product, 41 competitors must compensate customers for Switching Costs. The firm that has previously roped in the customer, then, can set or adjust prices in a way that puts their potential rival at a cost disadvantage, rendering such a challenge distinctly unattractive.

>  Switching Costs definition: The value loss expected by a customer that would be incurred from switching to an alternate supplier for additional purchases.

>  Switching Costs can be divided into three broad groups: 42 Financial .

>  Procedural Switching Costs are somewhat murkier but no less persuasive. They stem from the loss of familiarity with the product or from the the risk and uncertainty associated with the adoption of a new product.

>  Relational Switching Costs are those tolls which would result from the breaking of emotional bonds built up through use of the product and through interactions with other users and service providers.

>  As a market matures, the Benefit of Switching Costs becomes transparent to all players and they are able to calculate the value of an acquired customer. More often than not this leads to enhanced competition to grab new customers, which arbitrages out the Benefit for new customer acquisitions. 44 So the major value contribution comes from capturing customers before such value-destroying pricing arbitrage transpires. Switching Costs offer no Benefit if no additional related sales are made to the customer.

>  Switching Costs are a non-exclusive Power: their benefits are available to all players.

>  The potential benefits accrue only if you have a customer, so the competitive position component of Switching Costs is binary: you either have the customer, or you do not.

>  should note that such advantages can be swept away by tectonic shifts in technology. ERP firms know well this lesson; that’s why SAP and Oracle are presently doing their best to make certain they are not leapfrogged by cloud-based applications.

>  Tiffany’s success is evidenced by the fact that, although the Blue Box comes free with a purchase, it carries a standalone monetary value.

>  Benefit. A business with Branding is able to charge a higher price for its offering due to one or both of these two reasons: Affective valence. The built-up associations with the brand elicit good feelings about the offering, distinct from the objective value of the good.

>  A customer attains “peace of mind” knowing that the branded product will be as just as expected. Consider another example:

>  Barrier. A strong brand can only be created over a lengthy period of reinforcing actions ( hysteresis ), which itself serves as the key Barrier.

>  Branding definition: The durable attribution of higher value to an objectively identical offering that arises from historical information about the seller.

>  Seeking higher “down market” volumes can reduce affective valence by damaging the aura of exclusivity, weakening positive associations with the product. For example, Halston rose to fame in the 1970s as a high-end design standard for women’s clothing. However, when Halston accepted $1 billion from lower-end retailer J.C. Penney to expand into affordable fashion lines for the mass consumer, Bergdorf Goodman dropped the label in order to protect their brand. The J.C. Penney line was a failure, and the Halston name never recaptured its previously enviable Branding.

>  Branding relies upon repeated positive interactions with consumers, counterfeiters who flood the market with inconsistent offerings can gradually undermine it. For instance, in 2013 Tiffany sued Costco for intimating to shoppers that they sold Tiffany jewelery; the company had previously sued eBay for facilitating the sale of counterfeits.

>  Over time, customer preferences may vary in a way that undermines the value of Branding. Nintendo developed a brand for family-friendly video games. However, as the gaming demographic evolved from predominantly children to adults, there was a shift in demand for more mature games.

>  The affective valence may apply in one region but not another.

>  For example, even if “brand recognition” is very high, there may not be Branding Power. In instances like this, it could actually be Scale Economies creating heightened brand awareness.

>  in order to associate with an identity, there must be some way to signal the exclusion of alternative identities.

>  try to recruit their former employee back into the Disney fold. Lasseter demurred: “I can go to Disney and be a director, or I can stay here and make history.”

>  Cornered Resource definition: Preferential access at attractive terms to a coveted asset that can independently enhance value.

>  Examining the Pixar Brain Trust through this lens, then, proves highly informative. In particular, you might notice one striking aspect of the Brain Trust: it is largely restricted to a specific set of individuals. As a first indication, consider that every one of their first eleven films was directed by one of this group

>  Pixar’s record shows that simple inclusion into the group will not preternaturally endow newbie directors with the “Brain Trust process.”

>  What if a firm gains preferential access to a coveted resource, but then pays a price that fully arbitrages out the rents attributable to this resource? In this case, it fails the differential return test of Power. Consider movie stars. A turn by Brad Pitt would probably advance box office prospects, therefore proving “coveted,” but his compensation captures much or all of this additional value and so fails the Power test.

>  Another way to put this is that a Cornered Resource is a sufficient condition for potential for differential returns.

>  He was more impressed by the supermarkets he saw around the city: their system of restocking only when shelves had gone empty aligned with the parsimonious nature he had developed over years of war-driven shortages. He thought he could do better than Ford, and so he set to work. 62

>  “What’s curious is that few manufacturers have managed to imitate Toyota successfully even though the company has been extraordinarily open about its practices. Hundreds of thousands of executives from thousands of businesses have toured Toyota’s plants in Japan and the United States.” 66

>  You know, they never prohibited us from walking through the plant, understanding, even asking questions of some of their key people. I’ve often puzzled over that—why they did that. And I think they recognized, we were asking all the wrong questions. We didn’t understand this bigger picture thing. All of our questions were focused on the floor, the assembly plant, what’s happening on the line. That’s not the real issue. The issue is how do you support that system with all the other functions that have to take place in the organization?”

>  The Barrier in Process Power is hysteresis: these process advances are difficult to replicate, and can only be achieved over a long time period of sustained evolutionary advance.

>  The system was fashioned from the bottom up, over decades of trial and error. The fundamental tenets were never formally codified, and much of the organizational knowledge remained tacit, rather than explicit. It would not be an exaggeration to say that even Toyota did not have a full, top-down understanding of what they had created—it took fully fifteen years, for instance, before they were able to transfer TPS to their suppliers. GM’s experience with NUMMI also implies the tacit character of this knowledge: even when Toyota wanted to illuminate their work processes, they could not entirely do so.

>  Which brings us to our definition of Process Power: Embedded company organization and activity sets which enable lower costs and/or superior product, and which can be matched only by an extended commitment.

>  The rarity of Process Power results from the infrequency of the Barrier: an unyielding, long-time constant for the improvements in question. No matter how much you invest or how hard you try, the desired improvements are constrained by a boundary of potential that is tied to time, as seen in the NUMMI experience of GM.

>  Process Power equals operational excellence, plus hysteresis.

>  The Experience Curve was based on the empirical observation that many company costs seem to follow a downward trajectory that falls within a specified envelope: for each doubling of units produced (what’s meant formally by “experience”), the deflated cost per unit would be between 70% and 85% of what it had previously been prior to the doubling (referred to as “Slope”).

>  But usually such routines represent a Benefit with no Barrier; hence they do not result in Power.

>  Figure 7.5: Power Intensity Determinants

>  But let me offer a first insight right here up front: all Power starts with invention.

>  DVDs will continue to generate big profits in the near future. Netflix has at least another decade of dominance ahead of it. But movies over the Internet are coming, and at some point it will become big business…. That’s why the company is called Netflix, not DVD-By-Mail.

>  The second part of my caveat was likewise cautionary: Netflix had no yet-evident sources of Power in this new modality—the technology to stream was accessible to many, and the powerful content owners were implacably committed to wringing every penny from their rights.

>  operational excellence is not strategy.

>  Unfortunately, content holders could “variable cost price” the programming they licensed, charging Netflix according to usage. This put other licensors on an even footing with Netflix, regardless of scale, thus eliminating any chance of Power.

>  Ted Sarandos, the strategically acute Netflix content head, took the first step in addressing this challenge by pursuing exclusives.

>  But the owners of potential exclusive properties could take note of Netflix’s success. Eventually they would resort to bargaining hard for an outsized share of those returns, even using other streaming competitors as stalking horses. In fact, Epix did exactly this, ending its deal with Netflix and signing up instead with Amazon on Sept 4, 2012.

>  They were rewarded with increased subscriptions and numerous awards, including nine Primetime Emmy Nominations, a victory on the Benefit side, but also the beachhead for a victory on the Barrier side. Originals unequivocally rendered content a fixed cost, guaranteeing powerful Scale Economies, and they also permanently altered Netflix’s bargaining position with content owners.

>  Here’s the first important takeaway from our consideration of Dynamics: “getting there” (Dynamics) is completely different from “being there” (Statics).

>  In other words, to assess which journeys are worth taking, you must first understand which destinations are desirable. Fortunately the 7 Powers does exactly that: it maps the only seven worthwhile destinations.

>  Netflix adaptively found its way to streaming ascendancy via successive thoughtful experimentation, demonstrating once again that action is the first principle of strategy, just as it is in business.

>  With an eye toward deducing a more general understanding, let’s take a step back, reexamine all seven types of Power and ask the Dynamics question “What must you do to get there?”

>  Planning rarely creates Power. It may meaningfully boost Power once you have established it, but if Power does not yet exist, you can’t rely on planning.

>  Figure 8.4: The Dynamics of Power–1

>  Crafted, not designed.

>  So if you want to develop Power, your first step is invention: breakthrough products, engaging brands, innovative business models.

>  “Does Strategy matter to strategy?” Now you know the answer. Yes, it can matter, but only if it works to guide you toward Power in these decisive formative moments.

>  Invention drives a favorable change in system economics—you get more for less. The resulting gain in the end will be split somehow between your company and other segments of the value chain. The 7 Powers is all about making sure that you get some of the increase.

>  Just how much is enough? It is tempting to try to attach a number. Andy Grove, the formidable Intel CEO, did just that, suggesting that 10x was in the right ballpark.

>  There are three distinct paths to creating compelling value.

>  In the end, the advance of technology (the Internet, in this case) created an unexpected opportunity for Acrobat. HTML, the Internet’s enabling language, causes documents to reflow to match the user’s platform. Fine in most cases, but there are many documents (presentations and contracts, for example) which depend on preserving the exact look and feel of the original. Acrobat fulfilled this need. By the end of 1996, sales were up to $25 million; by the end of 1998, $58 million. Ten years later, Acrobat had emerged as a nearly billion-dollar business, an important contributor to Adobe’s value.

>  second path to compelling value is customer-led compelling value.

>  Frank Maurer, an MIT Physics Ph.D. and an old Corning hand, went the other direction. He decided to take pure silica, a glass already known for its clarity, and attempt to make waveguides out of it from scratch. The silica was a very ornery material with a high melting point and high viscosity, but it had two advantages going for it: it was already exceedingly clear from the start, and as a material, it was far more familiar to Corning than anyone else.

>  The uncertainty in this case is technical: “Can we invent it?”

>  The third and final path to compelling value is competitor-led.

>  In May 1993, the Executive Committee heard Tokunaka (Kutaragi’s immediate superior) and Kutaragi’s presentation and, following Ohga’s lead, approved a $50 million investment to develop the computer chip at the heart of the machine, despite the fact that prospects for the new business were at best uncertain… Tokunaka recalls that his hand trembled as he wrote a purchase order for 1.3 million computer chips…. 97

>  In cases of competitor-led compelling value, the uncertainty is two-fold: (1) Will the new features be differentially attractive enough to drive share gains? And (2) will the existing competitors be sufficiently delayed in their response?

>  Competitor-led origination often requires gut-wrenching big bang commitments up front.

>  Often, you must make formal arrangements with providers of complements ahead of time—they will not sign up without such commitments. For example, in the case of the PlayStation, Sony had to make such commitments to independent game companies to ensure they would create games for the platform in the first place. In the case of the iPhone, it was telecommunication giants.

>  Their experience proves particularly revealing because their failed memory business provides a perfect “control” case against which to counterpoint their lucrative microprocessor business. 104 All of Intel’s considerable advantages applied in equal measure to both these businesses: unexcelled leadership and management, technical depth, manufacturing prowess, an exploding market, and so on. But the outcomes were utterly different: a painful exit in memories, versus an enduring high-margin business in microprocessors. The difference? One had Power, while the other did not. These two case studies underscore the point: your business must attain Power.

>  On the customer front, the 4004 showed little commercial traction. Semiconductors are a component, not an end product. In such cases, purchase commitments depend on other manufacturers assessing the new component, designing it into their products and then offering those products to consumers.

>  Competitors also proved unexpectedly challenging. The long adoption lead times for the technology gave rivals ample time to build on Intel’s experience and develop products of their own. In late 1978, Intel was rocked on its heels to find that, rather than leading the pack, they were losing design wins.

>  “The one-sentence story of Intel is a single design win, then a decade and a half of very high Switching Costs, then Scale Economies.”

>  So there we have it: all of Intel’s sources of Power were rooted in the takeoff period. Again, takeoff is the stage when differential customer acquisition can take place at favorable terms, which is why it presents such ideal Power opportunities.

>  Often in the explosive growth stage, companies will exhibit quite attractive financials. The future looks bright. Long-term success seems assured. Unfortunately, if a company has not established Power, competitive arbitrage will catch up as soon as growth slows; fundamentals will assert themselves, and the favorable early returns will prove fleeting.

>  cringe every time a CEO or CFO says they are pleased by the entrance into their market of a well-heeled competitor, insisting it “validates the market.”

>  word of caution: parsing by growth should not create the impression that the phases above are congruent with the well-known product life cycle stages of introduction, growth, maturity and decline. They do not align, and the differences are critical.

>  Benefits are common, and they often bear little positive impact on company value, as they are generally subject to full arbitrage. The true potential for value lies in those rare instances in which you can prevent such arbitrage, and it is the Barrier which accomplishes this. Thus, the decisive attainment of Power often syncs up with the establishment of the Barrier.

>  Now let’s turn our attention to the origination stage that occurs before takeoff. There are two types of Power that typically become first available during this earlier period.

>  Cornered Resource. The crucial step in Intel’s microprocessor victory came when they reacquired the rights to their invention from Busicom, which they accomplished three years prior to takeoff.

>  Counter-Positioning requires the invention of an attractive business model that presents a vexing “damned if you do/damned if you don’t” cul-de-sac for incumbents. It is this business model’s whole product that creates the takeoff for the challenger, so it must precede that phase and occur during origination.

>  Thus Counter-Positioning and Cornered Resource are most likely to be established in the origination

>  Figure 9.6: Time-Delineated 7 Powers

>  Origination: Counter-Positioning and Cornered Resource Takeoff: Scale Economies, Network Economies and Switching Costs Stability: Process Power and Branding

>  In the lingo of economists: in Statics M 0 and g are taken as exogenous, whereas in Dynamics they are endogenous.

>  summary, when you step back to consider how Power is established in the first place, there are a lot more parts to the puzzle: leadership, timing, execution, cleverness and luck can all play decisive roles.

