---
title: Why Taiwan Matters - Small Island, Global Powerhouse
category: reading
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Shelley Rigger
layout: bookpost
tags:
- taiwan
- history
- china
- dutch
- japan
- gdp
- economy
- politics
- democracy
- communism
---

>  That leaves the island’s broad western plain as the homeland for almost 90 percent of Taiwan’s 23 million people, making it one of the world’s most densely populated places.

>  In the seventeenth century, explorers from China collected sulfur from the Taipei basin fumaroles to manufacture gunpowder, and the Japanese colonial government that ruled Taiwan in the early twentieth century placed a high value on its massive camphor trees, but the island’s lack of fossil fuel and ore deposits forces Taiwanese to rely on imports for industrial raw materials.

>  Most of the island’s major cities—past (Tainan, Lukang, Tamsui) and present (Kaohsiung, Taichung, Keelung, Hualien)—are ports.

>  Taiwan’s position on the trade routes connecting Northeast Asia and Southeast Asia gives it a critical role in global shipping and it is an important player in the international fishing industry and its regulatory organizations. Taiwanese boats take about 13 percent of the global tuna catch, for example.

>  Today’s Austronesians can be traced to Austronesian-speaking settlers who began living in Taiwan about four thousand years ago.

>  In 1544, a Portuguese vessel passed by Taiwan, and one of its passengers called it “Ilha Formosa,” beautiful island. The sailors recorded the remark in their ship’s log, giving the island the name by which the West has known it ever since.

>  By the mid-1600s, Taiwan had several significant Chinese towns populated by three distinct groups. Most settlers were Hokkien-speakers from the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou regions of Fujian. Their origins and dialects were similar, but not similar enough to keep the two groups from seeing one another as competitors, at times even enemies.

>  In one coastal city, clan rivalries played out in a bloody—but all-in-good-fun—annual ritual: the Lukang Rock Fight. Every year until the mid-twentieth century, the men of Lukang would gather outside town on a spring day, line up with their kinsmen and throw rocks at the other clans. When the supply of rocks dwindled, the combatants closed in for hand-to-hand fighting with sticks and fists. Women, children, and the aged stood around the fringes of the mayhem cheering their favorites and snacking on street food.

>  In 1659, Zheng Chenggong led troops on the mainland against the young Qing Dynasty. When the venture failed, he withdrew to Taiwan, and in 1661 drove the Dutch off the island. He vowed to fight on and restore the Ming.

>  In any case, the two decades when Zheng and his descendants governed Taiwan was a period of relative prosperity. The Zhengs promoted agricultural development and continued the Dutch policy of keeping most farmland in government hands.

>  The Zheng family’s effort to keep the Ming Dynasty alive was long remembered but short-lived: in 1683, the Qing admiral Shi Lang defeated Ming-loyalist forces led by Zheng Chenggong’s grandson. For the first time in history, a government seated in the mainland capital had secured effective control over Taiwan.

>  The Qing empire incorporated Taiwan as a prefecture within Fujian Province. The island’s lowly status reflected its marginal position in the empire, as a “place beyond civilization.”

>  In one illustrative (but not unique) example, a loosely organized group calling itself the Heaven and Earth Society carried out a series of violent revolts in central Taiwan in the 1700s and 1800s. The group slaughtered one city’s entire cadre of Qing officials in 1787, then murdered their replacements eight years later. In the 1860s, a new Heaven and Earth Society was killing officials in the same region.

>  On April 17, 1895, Chinese representatives signed the Treaty of Shimonoseki, ceding Taiwan to the empire of Japan. Acquiring colonies was a crucial element in Meiji Japan’s strategy of defensive modernization. Japan was desperate to prove to the West that it was a modern state—a colonizer, not a territory eligible for colonization by others.

>  As the war continued, the Japanese Imperial Army even exploited the Austronesian peoples for their fighting spirit and knowledge of mountainous terrain. Japan recruited as many as eight thousand Austronesian men for guerrilla fighting in the jungles of Southeast Asia. Several thousand Taiwanese—both Austronesian and Chinese—are honored at the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo, the controversial shrine to Japan’s war dead.

>  When the Chinese political activist Sun Yat-sen, who was on a fund-raising trip in the United States, heard the news he rushed back to China to help set up a new Chinese state based on democratic principles. On January 1, 1912, Sun declared the founding of the Republic of China, or ROC. A month later, the Qing emperor abdicated the throne, although it was decades before the ROC managed to bring all the former Qing territories under its effective control.

>  Japan’s surrender in 1945 brought new hope to China. In November 1943, Chiang Kai-shek met with British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt in Cairo to discuss the Allied nations’ plans for a postwar settlement in Asia. Their joint declaration promised to strip Japan of all territories seized since 1914, and it specified that “all the territories Japan has stolen from the Chinese, such as Manchuria, Formosa and the Pescadores (Penghu Islands), shall be restored to the Republic of China.”

>  While Taiwanese had once complained of Japan’s iron-fisted approach to law enforcement, the new government’s failure to stem the explosion in bribery, corruption, theft of public (and private) property, arbitrary law enforcement, and other abuses produced nostalgia for the Japanese era. As a popular saying put it, “The dogs are gone; the pigs have arrived.”

>  On March 10, the governor declared the groups helping to resolve the crisis illegal; negotiations were over, and the ROC government was dictating terms. ROC forces used the uprising as a justification to round up political dissidents and local elites of all stripes. Many were murdered on the spot; others were executed after cursory trials. Historians believed close to twenty thousand Taiwanese were killed and an even larger number injured as the military reestablished control.

>  Taiwan’s history made it a melting pot shared by Austronesian peoples, Hokkien-speaking migrants arriving from various regions of Fujian at various times, Hakkas driven out of southern China, and Mainlanders from all corners of China who became Taiwanese by accident. The island’s modern history began with a tragic collision of these groups.

>  They learned more quickly in school because they were being taught in a language they understood, and by the time their Taiwanese classmates had mastered the language, they already were ahead in their studies. The government reinforced this advantage by making Mandarin proficiency a criterion for educational and career advancement. The state-owned companies that dominated major industries were led by Mandarin-speaking executives, while Taiwanese military conscripts were commanded by an overwhelmingly Mainlander officer corps.

>  In the 1970s, things began to change. Taiwanese began standing up for their culture and demanding recognition. The transformation began with a literary movement known as “Hometown Literature.”

>  After 2000, Taiwanese youth even took on one of the most painful images of the past, the “Taike” or Taiwanese bumpkin stereotype. “Taike” was a taunt that captured stereotypes of Taiwanese as backward and déclassé, something like the American term “redneck.”

>  For Mainlanders—and many Hakkas and Austronesian people as well—the flowering of Hokkien pride was a troubling trend. Pride easily slipped into chauvinism, and chauvinism was used to justify prejudice.

>  Many Mainlanders—including those born in Taiwan to Mainlander parents—felt tainted by their family origins. Suddenly, it was Mainlanders who felt they were second-class citizens. In 1990, a young Mainlander told the Taiwanese newspaper Liberty Times, “Overseas, no one thought we were Chinese; they said we were Taiwanese. In Taiwan, no one thought we were Taiwanese; they said we were Mainlanders.

>  For almost twenty years, pollsters have been asking Taiwanese “Do you think of yourself as Taiwanese, Chinese or both?” Back in the early 1990s, when education and mass media were still pushing the Chinese nationalist agenda, about a quarter of the people said “Chinese,” and about 45 percent said “both.” Since then, the proportion of people who call themselves “Chinese” has plummeted to about 5 percent, and the share of those who say they are “Taiwanese” has risen from the high teens to more than 40 percent.

>  One of the newest languages in Taiwan is “Martian”—a user-friendly shorthand to use in text messaging. Martian relies on roman letters to convey a mélange of Chinese and English words: 3Q (pronounced “san Q”) means “thank you”; 88 (ba ba) means “bye bye.”

>  The journey from White Terror to gay pride parade has been long and difficult. In traveling that distance, Taiwan has melted what began as diverse and hostile groups into a society that disagrees on many things, but is united around one fact: Taiwan is their home, and they will chart her course together.

>  Taiwan is a small country, but it plays an outsized role in the global economy. It’s one of the world’s top fifteen trading nations, and its companies manufacture a huge share of the information technology that keeps modern societies going: 98 percent of computer motherboards, 90 percent of notebook PCs, 65 percent or more of thin-film

>  As early as the 1600s, Austronesian hunters were harvesting wild deer in Taiwan and exchanging them for salt with Chinese traders who delivered them to the mainland as medicine and meat.

>  When agents of the Dutch East India Company set up their trading colony at Anping in 1623, they upgraded the deer-products trade, using their superior trade connections and transportation technology to expand the market. Antlers and meat went to China, while deer hides were sold to Japanese artisans who crafted them into samurai armor. At the height of Dutch colonization, Taiwan’s deer hide exports averaged over sixty thousand per year.

>  Recognizing his dilemma, Chiang Kai-shek launched a thoroughgoing overhaul of the ROC’s economic policies guided by the “whatsoever principle”: whatsoever was required to preserve security and stabilize the economy should be done.

>  Most governments leave economic decision making to politicians—or at least give them veto power over it—but the ROC authorized officials chosen for their technical abilities to create national economic policy based on their best judgment, then insulated those technocrats from outside pressure. The most famous technocrats were K. Y. Yin, who took the leading role until his death in 1963, and his successor, K. T. Li, who led Taiwan’s economic policy making through the 1980s.

>  To build Taiwan into a base capable of propelling the ROC back to mainland China would require industrialization, so the KMT turned its attention inward, purging corrupt officials and promoting a new cadre of economic policy makers dedicated to developing the island’s economy. To jump-start industrialization, economic bureaucrats adopted policies aimed at substituting locally made goods for imports.

>  Given its massive competitive advantage in the 1950s, it could have extended its monopoly beyond petrochemical fuels to plastics—but it didn’t. Despite its initial advantage—and strong state support—CPC is not Taiwan’s major plastics producer. That honor belongs to a built-from-scratch private firm, Formosa Plastics. Today, the Formosa Plastics Group is a massive global conglomerate with twenty-two companies in Taiwan and six overseas, but it grew from the humblest of roots.

>  Taiwan’s economic bureaucrats signaled the shift toward export-oriented manufacturing in 1960 when they unveiled the Nineteen Point Program for Economic and Financial Reform. The plan—which liberalized trade, expanded the role of the private sector, and encouraged savings and investment—smelled strongly of Washington, but it served the needs of Taiwan’s manufacturing sector, too.

>  Taiwan’s innovative economic planners also invented economic processing zones—industrial parks in which firms were exempt from many taxes and regulations. The first EPZ opened in Kaohsiung in 1966. It attracted strong interest from international investors, especially manufacturers from the United States and Japan. Within two years, it had met its targets for investment, export value, and employment, prompting the state to construct EPZs in several other cities.

>  “It’s better to be a chicken’s head than an ox’s ass”—so say Taiwan’s entrepreneurs. The colorful idiom captures the essence of Taiwan’s business culture, and it goes a long way toward explaining why SMEs play such a huge role in the island’s economy—almost 80 percent of employment and 50 percent of exports.

>  Whatever brand name they bore, they were almost always manufactured in small, family-owned factories linked together in production networks clustered around dusty village crossroads. The owners of these factories rarely had engineering degrees or MBAs; they learned their businesses by working as laborers, machinists, and apprentices. Once they’d acquired the skills they wanted, they struck out on their own, earning them the nickname “black-hand bosses”—entrepreneurs who’d gotten their hands dirty on the way up and weren’t squeamish about pitching in on the factory floor.

>  The “Boss Wife” (laobanniang) was a key player in these businesses—serving multiple management functions, and pitching in when necessary on the factory floor.

>  Clustering small firms for joint manufacturing promoted cooperation among relatives, schoolmates, and friends. It also promoted flexibility and minimized marketing costs. SMEs learned to retool quickly to meet the demand for new products. Often, a whole cluster could get by with sending one representative to trade shows to collect orders from foreign buyers.

>  Capital was especially precious in Taiwan’s SME economy, because small firms’ access to formal credit was minimal. Banking and finance were weak points in the ROC economy, and government credit policy favored large companies. It was nearly impossible for SMEs to borrow money in conventional ways, so they turned to informal sources of capital, including mutual aid societies, or hui.

>  Hui are a fascinating solution to the shortage of credit in developing economies; they resemble microloans, but require no outside sponsor. If a Taiwanese wants to assemble a hui, he or she (hui are very common among women) invites friends, relatives, coworkers, and business associates to join. The duration of the hui typically is one month per member; they tend to last between one and three years. The first month, each member contributes a set amount of money, and the founder takes the whole kitty. Thereafter, everyone (including the founder) continues to pay in the same monthly contribution, but the other members bid for the kitty. The winning bid is, in effect, interest paid to the remaining members. Each member gets to “buy” the kitty one time; the longer you wait, the more interest you can earn.

>  And few tears are shed for those who lose money by joining hui with strangers, because everyone understands that absolute trust is an absolute requirement for joining hui.

>  In 1969 the company adopted a mascot, Tatung Boy. Tatung Boy is a strapping, round-faced lad dressed in rugby gear, rugby ball tucked under one arm. He’s cheerful and cute, but he was designed to deliver some stern lessons. To begin with, there’s a slot in his head to put money in, because, as the company founder famously stated, “Entrepreneurship starts with the saving of one dollar.” His extra-large head and eyes reflect the importance of staying smart and keeping an eye on consumer trends; his oversized feet reflect Tatung’s pioneering spirit. The rugby outfit symbolizes teamwork.

>  Tatung’s recent history highlights another important dimension of Taiwan’s economic “miracle,” the shift from traditional manufacturing to high-tech production. Between 1990 and 2000, electrical products’ share of Taiwan’s exports doubled, to more than 20 percent. Today, Taiwan is a global leader in IT manufacturing. Its companies have a huge market share in critical IT products, and it is constantly moving forward with cutting-edge technologies, including nanotechnology and biotechnology.

>  In 1973, the ROC merged three government research institutes to form the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI). ITRI’s charge was to develop new industrial technology and upgrade industrial techniques in the private sector, and it has been spectacularly successful. In 1976 ITRI used technology licensed from RCA to begin semiconductor research; three years later, it spun off United Microelectronics (UMC). UMC was Taiwan’s first semiconductor manufacturer, and it is one of the world’s leading makers of integrated circuits (IC) today. In 1987 ITRI birthed another IC giant, Taiwan Semiconductor (TSMC). In 1985 it collaborated with Giant Bicycle Inc. to develop carbon-fiber materials that allowed Giant to enter the top ranks of high-end bicycle manufacturing. Tens of thousands of ITRI “alumni” are working in Taiwan’s industrial firms today.

>  At the same time, however, the island’s rapid economic growth produced massive trade surpluses and a spike in savings. To pacify its trade partners—including the United States—Taiwan followed Japan’s lead in the mid 1980s. It dropped protectionist trade barriers and allowed its currency to rise in value. These liberalizing reforms were necessary, but they raised the price of Taiwan’s exports.

>  Just as Wang Yung-ching’s private venture caught up with its state-owned competitor, the service sector eventually overtook manufacturing. Industry’s contribution to Taiwan’s economy peaked around 1980, when it constituted almost half of GDP. Since then, services have grown to occupy about three-fourths of Taiwan’s economy. Agriculture—the leading sector just sixty years ago—now accounts for less than 2 percent of the island’s GDP.

>  Although it didn’t look that way in the 1950s and 1960s, the ROC state was not built on an authoritarian foundation. The constitution adopted in 1947 is a democratic document; it rests on the ideas of Sun Yat-sen, a man whose impulses—if not always his actions—leaned toward democracy. Sun’s political philosophy was rooted in his “Three Principles of the People”: nationalism, democracy, and well-being. His Chinese approximation of Lincoln’s “government of the people, by the people and for the people” carried the same democratic promise that Lincoln had in mind when he spoke those memorable words.

>  Although the ROC state incorporated many compromises aimed at accommodating the political realities of early twentieth-century China, it took the three principles as the basis of its legitimacy. But democracy was not its only value—or even its primary one—for the ROC also was a nationalist state. For the ROC government, the survival of the Chinese nation was a precondition for democratization.

>  To reconcile democracy and nationalism, Sun prescribed a three-stage process. In the first phase, a military government would unite China, fulfilling the nationalist mission and establishing a foundation for democracy. During the second phase—which Sun called “political tutelage”—a provisional government would rule the nation while the Chinese people learned the skills of democratic citizenship through local self-government. Only after these two phases were completed would China enter the third and final phase—constitutional government.

>  Ilan’s remoteness preserved its wild natural beauty and rich Hokkien culture. Few Mainlanders ventured over the mountains to live there, and the young Chen Chu grew up immersed in her Hokkien heritage with its unique language, stories, beliefs, music, aromas, flavors, and outlook. Her grandfather was a traditional Taiwanese patriarch who maintained a household of up to forty people, but when Chen Chu was ready for school, he took a progressive view: Chen Chu was the first girl in her family to attend high school, and she graduated from a technical college in 1968.

>  The ROC government used education and popular culture to encourage all Taiwan residents to identify with China. At first, its efforts were directed to wiping out Japanese cultural influences, but over time the focus shifted to replacing Taiwanese identities—Hokkien, Hakka, and Austronesian—with a homogenized Chinese identity. Even though more than three-quarters of the people living in Taiwan in 1950 spoke Hokkien, the ROC government imposed Mandarin as the national language. School curricula stressed Chinese history and mainland geography; students learned exactly as much about Taiwan—the only “province” most would ever visit—as they did about each of the ROC’s thirty-five other provinces.

>  In 1948, citizens throughout China elected representatives to the Legislative Yuan and National Assembly. By 1950, about half of those elected members had found their way to Taiwan, where they took their seats in parliamentary bodies representing their constituents on the mainland. When the time came for new elections a year later, the Judicial Yuan made a fateful decision: the legislators elected in 1948 would retain their seats until new elections could be held in the mainland. Electing new members from among the residents of Taiwan, the logic went, would disenfranchise voters in the rest of China and overbalance the parliamentary bodies in favor of a single province. Of course, holding new elections in the mainland was never possible.

>  In particular, the regime sought to wipe out any thought that Taiwan might seek its destiny independent of China. Thousands of Taiwanese and Mainlanders were swept up by the White Terror, suffering imprisonment, torture, even execution.

>  Chiang Ching-kuo’s biography held little promise for his future as a reformer. From age fifteen to twenty-seven he lived in the Soviet Union, first as a student, then as a political hostage. He was allowed to return to China only after his father revived his alliance with the Chinese Communist Party when Japan invaded China. As an officer of the ROC government, CCK played many roles, but his image in Taiwan was shaped by his fifteen years heading the secret police. To many Taiwanese, his was the hand behind the widespread human rights abuses of the White Terror era.

>  As CCK ascended toward the presidency, however, he chose a different approach. As premier, he opened new opportunities for Taiwanese in government. While Mainlanders retained a disproportionate share of national bureaucratic positions, CCK promoted Taiwanese for provincial and local posts. He appointed the first Taiwanese provincial governor and vice premier. He also spearheaded efforts to increase Taiwanese participation in the KMT, both at the grassroots level and in the leadership: between 1973 and 1979, Taiwanese representation on the KMT central standing committee more than doubled. In 1982 Chiang surprised observers by naming Lee Teng-hui—a Taiwanese—to be his vice president (and, given CCK’s failing health, his likely successor).

>  Despite their successful collaboration, the Dangwai legislators Huang Hsin-chieh and Kang Ning-hsiang did not see eye to eye on every issue. Kang advocated “political kungfu,” turning a stronger opponent’s strength against him rather than trying to overpower him. Huang believed in using strong words and actions to win democratic reform. Their relationship characterized a pattern in Taiwan’s opposition movement: moderate and militant groups working together despite tactical disagreements.

>  His wife saw his injuries and asked if he was being tortured. Lin, who says his captors had threatened to harm his family if he spoke of his treatment, did not deny her suspicions. The next day, while police had Lin’s home under twenty-four-hour surveillance, someone broke in and stabbed his mother and seven-year-old twin daughters to death. His older daughter survived, with terrible injuries. Chen Chu got the news in her prison cell: the sweet, vivacious girls with their adorable Ilan accents were dead. It was the lowest moment of her six-year ordeal.

>  The crime—which has never been solved—horrified Taiwanese. Lin Yi-hsiung had played no role in the Human Rights Day demonstration; he had not even planned to attend, but was called to the rally late in the day to help calm the crowd. Yet he was in prison, his family slaughtered. The brutality of the attack was unprecedented, beyond comprehension, and there was no way the regime could escape blame. A political show trial designed to silence the Dangwai instead exposed the regime’s merciless determination to crush the opposition.

>  He made hundreds of speeches paying homage to the KMT’s dream of mainland recovery. As president, he instituted the Guidelines for National Unification, a blueprint for uniting Taiwan with mainland China. It was only after he stepped down after twelve years as president of the Republic of China that Lee was free to speak his mind. And what was in his mind was surprising indeed: he soon became the world’s most prominent Taiwan independence advocate.

>  Lee Teng-hui’s response was pure genius: instead of trying to pacify the conservatives, Lee harnessed the popularity of democratization to strengthen his own position. He became a leading reform advocate; in the process, he increased popular support for the KMT and marginalized the conservatives.

>  He fended off unwelcome initiatives and refused to back down in the face of military intimidation. In doing so, Lee signaled to Beijing that unification in any form would require lengthy and sensitive negotiation. He made it clear that whether Beijing’s plan was to absorb Taiwan into the PRC or unite with the ROC in a marriage of equals, Taiwan would hold out for its own interests. He was wildly popular, so much so that the media coined the pseudo-psychological term “Lee Teng-hui Complex” to describe Taiwan people’s attachment to him.

>  The 2000 election was truly historic: an opposition party candidate had captured the top office in the Republic of China. Chen Shui-bian had completed his journey from poverty to presidency. After decades of struggle, Taiwan’s democratic activists and politicians took enormous pride and satisfaction in Chen’s victory.

>  Those who had questioned the wisdom of the moderate strategy felt vindicated: obviously, they argued, neither the PRC nor the KMT was interested in real negotiation or compromise. Trying to cooperate with them was futile; if the Chen presidency was to mean anything, they said, Chen must take whatever power he possessed and use it to advance cherished DPP goals.

>  The showdown came in October. When the legislature appropriated funds to complete a fourth nuclear plant, Chen refused to release the money. Opposing nuclear power was a defining principle for the DPP, but KMT legislators were so furious at what they considered an abuse of executive power that they launched a petition to recall him from office. It was the first of many recall attempts that would be made during Chen Shui-bian’s eight years in office.

>  For months, the KMT used its legislative majority to block the DPP’s referendum proposal, but in October 2003, Chen Shui-bian experienced an expected windfall thanks to an unlikely benefactor: the United States. For George W. Bush, support for Taiwan was an ideological reflex. Early in his presidency he made a number of gestures that suggested he would be more pro-Taiwan than any recent predecessor, including at one point saying the United States would do “whatever it takes” to help Taiwan defend itself.

>  And then, on March 19, the night before the election, the election took a bizarre twist. Chen and his running mate, vice president Annette Lu, were standing in an open jeep, driving through the streets of Tainan, waving to voters. As the parade wound down, Chen and Lu both realized they were injured and bleeding. When they looked more closely, they discovered they’d been shot, he across the abdomen (the bullet lodged in his jacket after gashing his skin), she in the knee. Taiwan’s army of talk-show hosts jumped into action.

>  No one knows what effect the events of March 19 had on the outcome of the election. The race was close coming into the final week, but whether Chen would have won without the “Two Bullet Incident” is unknowable. Many KMT analysts and foreign scholars are convinced the shooting boosted turnout among Chen’s supporters and won him a significant number of sympathy votes. I spent March 20 visiting polling stations in a rural part of central Taiwan, and my conversations there left me convinced that the fury at Sisy Chen’s accusations was even more powerful a factor than the shooting itself.

>  Chen’s second inaugural speech focused on reuniting a society fractured by conflicts over politics, language, ancestry, and collective memory. He addressed the postelection crisis head-on, acknowledging that his victory was narrow and political trust had been damaged. “The ultimate challenge of this past election lay not as much in garnering a mandate as in the post-election hurdle of how to scale the wall of antagonism, and in finding ways to reconcile the deep divide caused by distrust,” said Chen. “We must not allow the narrow margin of victory to become a source of greater conflict in society.”

>  lost the Guggenheim museum after they had made the decision to come because I couldn’t get it through the city council. There was a lack of local and central support. After that I got smarter.” He learned to operate more effectively within the city council and to focus on projects with wide appeal—a baseball stadium (baseball is Taiwan’s most popular spectator sport), a multipurpose amphitheater, public concerts. “When we started, each citizen attended an average of four cultural events a year. Last year [2009] we averaged 33 attendances per citizen.”

>  Speaking about missile tests Beijing was using to intimidate Taiwanese in the run-up to the first direct presidential election, Friedman referred to China as an 800-pound gorilla in Taiwan’s living room. Hu replied, “Tom, it’s worse than that. Not only do I have an 800-pound gorilla in my living room, that gorilla happens to think that he’s my brother!”

>  If there ever was an “old KMT” that KMT taught me to be Chinese, but not to be pro-unification. Even CCK said, toward the end of his life, that he was both Chinese and Taiwanese. We don’t have to dichotomize these things. China is our father; Taiwan is our mother, or the other way around. Can we deny either one of them? I don’t have to disbelieve what the old KMT has taught us to be a politician close to the people. I grew up knowing I was a Taiwanese, despite having Mainlander parents. When I was small I was puzzled: The teacher, and other people, said “Speak Mandarin,” but when it was time for elections, all the politicians spoke Taiwanese. So I couldn’t understand: What’s wrong with speaking dialect?

>  Before Taiwan began industrializing in the early twentieth century, many rural parents solved the problem of finding a wife for their son by adopting a small girl into the household when the son was still a boy. When the two came of age, they were married. Taiwanese parents liked these “simpua” marriages because they saved the expense of a wedding and allowed the mother-in-law to train her daughter-in-law from an early age. Taiwanese sons, however, did not like simpua marriage: they actively resisted wedding girls who had been raised as their sisters.

>  Young Taiwanese tend to keep their romantic relationships quiet until they’re ready to announce an engagement—in part because they don’t want their parents pushing them toward marriage until they’re sure. And the formal process of getting married begins when the two sets of parents begin negotiating the terms of the engagement and wedding; it is impossible to carry out a Taiwanese wedding without extensive parental involvement. The process can stretch over many months.

>  One evolving engagement ritual is especially telling: in the past, the prospective mother-in-law attempted to force a gold ring onto the bride’s finger. The bride was expected to put up a robust resistance; if she let her mother-in-law succeed too easily, it meant the bride would be browbeaten. Today, some brides and grooms enact a similar ritual, placing rings on one another’s fingers. The partner who resists the ring longer, it is said, will have the upper hand in the marriage. The symbolism shifts the focus of marriage from the mother-in-law–daughter-in-law tie to the husband-and-wife relationship.

>  For many Taiwanese couples, the first thing to do upon becoming engaged—even before exchanging family gifts—is to sign a contract with a photography studio. Bridal photography is a huge industry in Taiwan. Every town has at least a few shops dedicated to capturing idealized images of marital love and feminine beauty.

>  Bonnie Adrian, an anthropologist who studies Taiwan’s bridal photography industry, believes the appeal of bridal photography is that it unites the bride and groom, however fleetingly, in a vision of marriage that resists the workaday reality. As she writes, “Many view the photographs as the bride’s ‘last time’ to enjoy high status as a young, attractive, independent woman before she becomes burdened by household work and familial demands.” The photos freeze a moment in time when the bride is at the pinnacle of her feminine charm, and the groom is entirely smitten.

>  Spirits also communicate through objects. It is common to see devotees in Taiwanese temples dropping boe, a pair of cashew-shaped wooden blocks, onto the floor in front of a deity’s altar. Questions posed in prayer can be answered by boe; how they fall indicates the response—yes, no, maybe. More complicated information can be elicited through the use of a kio-a, or spirit chair. Worshippers hoist the kio-a onto their shoulders like a sedan chair, whereupon a spirit takes possession and jerks the bearers around the temple. Interpreters watch closely to discern the words traced by the chair’s wild movements.

>  The number of Christians in Taiwan—about nine hundred thousand—puts their population at a small but sustainable number—a little under 5 percent of islanders. Christians have played a much larger role in Taiwan’s political development than their small numbers would suggest. Chiang Kai-shek was a Christian, and his wife was quite an assertive one. Their religious conviction helped win support from the United States before and after World War II, and in the three decades after the war, Christianity enjoyed a privileged position in Taiwan.

>  The more the KMT insisted on defining Chinese language as Mandarin and Chinese culture as the lifestyle and value system of China’s literati, the more ordinary Taiwanese began to doubt their “Chineseness.” In response, they turned inward, looking to the island as the source of its own unique culture. The struggle between these two versions of Taiwanese cultural identity played out against a background of rapid globalization.

>  Lin likes to say Jimmy Carter made him famous, because on the day Legacy premiered, Carter announced his decision to normalize relations with the PRC and cut diplomatic ties with Taiwan. The revelation was a massive blow to Taiwanese, so Cloud Gate’s performance of Taiwanese history had special resonance for its traumatized audience. The dance unleashed a flood of grief, fear, anger, and defiance. As Lin describes it, “The performance turned into a rally.”

>  To fill the gap between the demand for wives and the supply of women willing to marry, Taiwanese have turned to marriage migrants, whom Taiwanese call “foreign brides.” The marriage migration trend peaked in 2003, when nearly a third of marriages in Taiwan, more than fifty-five thousand, included foreign-born spouses—nearly all of them women. Two-thirds of those spouses came from the PRC; Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries contributed the rest.

>  No one really knows how many Taiwanese are living in mainland China today, or how much money they have invested there, but everyone agrees the numbers are huge and growing. In 2007, Taiwanese paid 4.6 million visits to the mainland, an increase of almost 5 percent over 2006. According to Taiwan government statistics, Taiwanese invested nearly U.S. $ 10 billion in mainland China in 2007, with the total investment accumulated since 1987 as high as U.S. $ 65 billion. And even the Taiwan government admits these figures are far too low, since much of Taiwan’s investment in the mainland is funneled through intermediary nations. Together, Taiwan and the two biggest intermediaries—the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands—accounted for 30 percent of China’s direct foreign investment in 2007. Taiwan and China also are among one another’s most important trading partners. In 2006, Taiwan was China’s ninth-largest export market, and its third-largest source of imports. For Taiwan, China was the number-one export market, and number-two source of imported goods.

>  The business practices Taiwanese manufacturers followed when they moved to the mainland reveal much about the Chinese economy of the time. Taiwanese companies did not license Chinese firms to produce for them; they moved their own operations to China. They did not buy Chinese equipment; they dismantled factories in Taiwan and transported the machinery, in most cases through Hong Kong. They rarely purchased land for factories, preferring instead to minimize their financial exposure by leasing space. Nor did they hire local Chinese to run their factories; Taishang (Taiwanese entrepreneurs) moved to the mainland to supervise their operations directly. Few Taishang looked to local suppliers to provide inputs; instead, whole supply chains moved together and set up shop close together, reproducing the clustered production process they had used in Taiwan.

>  Furniture magnate Kuo Shan-hui’s tenure heading Dongguan’s TBA is legendary, an example of TBA leadership at its best. Kuo reached out to the Dongguan city government and built personal relationships with key local officials. He used those relationships to help other Taishang set up shop in the city, creating thousands of jobs and fattening the city’s tax rolls. He also deployed Taiwanese capital strategically to cement ties between Tai-shang and the city, including mobilizing Taishang to underwrite prestigious projects for the Dongguan government. While Kuo was more successful than most TBA heads, his wide-ranging efforts on behalf of his constituents were typical.

>  By 1997, the pressure to lower costs had prompted a large-scale shift in manufacturing to mainland China. Five years later, Taiwanese controlled around two-thirds of the PRC’s output of information technology products, and half of Taiwanese firms’ IT output was produced on the mainland. Today, Taiwan-owned companies like Foxconn, Taiwan Semiconductor, Asustek, and Quanta employ hundreds of thousands of Chinese workers and have become an indispensable source of high-tech products for the world.

>  In 2009 Taiwanese were granted almost eight thousand new U.S. patents (three times as many as the PRC), putting Taiwan fifth in the world. By making themselves both the most reliable and the cheapest IT hardware manufacturers, Taiwanese firms have managed to capture a huge market share in numerous industries, making 90 percent of the world’s notebook computers, 98 percent of its motherboards, 78 percent of its LCD monitors, and so on, in 2007.

>  Taiwanese companies manufacturing in China rarely buy inputs from Chinese-owned suppliers. Whether they are making running shoes, bicycles, or notebook computers, their supply chains are overwhelmingly Taiwanese. Global brands demand low prices, but they also require high quality and absolute reliability. Taiwanese firms have proven to the big international players—and to one another—that their operations in China can deliver both. Letting an unproven Chinese supplier into the chain puts a whole supply chain’s relationship with the global brands at risk.

>  The critic’s bemusement is revealing: the effort to recover a shared identity for all Taiwanese often has pushed aside attempts to validate and celebrate individual identities. In Cicada, Lin ignores the Hometown writers’ collectivist ethic. His concern is the individual; he despairs of finding meaning in a nation that answers its youth’s longing for freedom by offering different brands of cigarettes. Lin’s fiction was fiercely critical of authoritarianism, but he was more interested in exposing the ways Confucian authoritarianism stigmatizes the liberated mind, the autonomous intellectual, the “deviant” artist than in attacking the KMT. Says one character, “‘ Thinking! You’re always thinking! Your trouble is you think too much! Who wants you to think? All you’re supposed to do is study and study.’”

