---
title: Super Pumped - The Battle for Uber
category: reading
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Mike Isaac
layout: bookpost
tags:
- billgurley
- cautionarytale
- benchmark
- foundingstory
- uber
- traviskalanick
- travis
- founder
- venturecapital
- startups
---

>  Uber was ready. Whenever it entered a new city, the company used the same, reliable approach. Someone from Uber headquarters would travel to a new city and hire a local “general manager”—usually a fired-up twentysomething, or perhaps someone with a scrappy, startup mentality. That manager would spend weeks flooding Craigslist with want ads for drivers, enticing them with sign-up bonuses and thousands of dollars in cash for hitting milestones. “Let drivers know they get $ 500 cash when they take their first ride on UberX,” the advertisements said. For the most part, the GMs placing these ads had little professional experience, but that wasn’t a problem for the company’s recruiters. Uber only expected that new field operations staff have ambition, the capacity to work twelve-to fourteen-hour days, and a willingness to evade the rules—even laws—when necessary.

>  What England didn’t know was that Uber’s general managers, engineers, and security professionals had developed a sophisticated system, perfected over months, designed to help every city strike team—including the one in Portland—identify would-be regulators, surveil them, and secretly prohibit them from ordering and catching Ubers by deploying a line of code in the app. The effect: Uber’s drivers would evade capture as they carried out their duties. Officers like England could not “see” the shady activity, and could never prove it was happening.

>  After zeroing in on problematic individuals, the company would deploy one of its most effective weapons: Greyball. Greyball was a snippet of code affixed to a user’s Uber account, a tag that identified that person as a threat to the company. It could be a police officer, a legislative aide or, in England’s case, a transportation official.

>  For the next three years, Uber operated with impunity in Portland. It wasn’t until 2017 when the New York Times broke the story of how Uber used Greyball to evade the authorities that Portland officials fully understood just how Uber had carried out its subterfuge.

>  But ask a typical Uber employee at the time—and even some supporters years later—and they will tell you they didn’t see it that way. Greyball was consistent with one of Uber’s fourteen company values: Principled Confrontation. Uber was protecting its drivers while confronting what they saw as a “corrupt” taxi industry that had been protected by bureaucracy and outdated regulations. Concepts like “breaking the law” weren’t applicable, they believed, when the laws were bullshit in the first place.

>  Some took it too far, even by Uber standards. One employee hired a pair of prostitutes to join him in his hotel room. The next morning, he and his roommate woke up with all of their belongings stolen, including their work laptops. Uber management, terrified of company secrets being sold on the black market, fired the employees on the spot and tried to track down the hardware.

>  More than any other company, Amazon embodied the type of business he wanted Uber to become. As Kalanick saw it, delivering people from place to place was only the beginning of Uber’s potential; one day, Uber would match drivers with packages, food, and retail goods, and solve untold numbers of other logistical problems. Kalanick imagined he would one day become a direct challenger to Bezos, reshaping the way people and goods moved major urban centers. Uber wanted to be the Amazon for the twenty-first century.

>  But it was an employee’s level of “super pumpedness” that made all of the difference in a performance review. “Super pumpedness is all about moving the team forward, working long hours—pretty much a do-whatever-it-takes attitude to move the company in the right direction,” as one Uber employee explained the term. If there was one quality Travis Kalanick looked for in a new recruit, it was that they were as super pumped as he was to work for Uber.

>  “Look, we are running out of money,” Kalanick told Ovitz. “It’s clear you aren’t funding this, and we need to go find money.” If Ovitz wasn’t going to give them funding soon, Kalanick needed to raise money somewhere else. Three days later, Ovitz sued Scour for breaking the no-shop clause. Kalanick was livid. One of his investors—someone who was supposed to have his back and support the company—was suing his own founders for breach of contract. “We’ve got this really litigious hardcore dude out of LA suing us,” Kalanick later told other entrepreneurs. “Do you think anyone else is going to give us money? No.”

>  Almost immediately after Scour closed its doors, Kalanick started brainstorming with Michael Todd, one of his Scour co-founders. In relatively short order, the two of them dreamed up what Kalanick called his “revenge business,” a way to get back at the RIAA and MPAA, and the other companies who sued the partners and torpedoed Scour. That company was called Red Swoosh.

>  “We basically took our expertise in peer-to-peer technology, took those thirty-three litigants, and turned them into customers,” Kalanick said. The new idea was similar to Scour: Red Swoosh would use connected “peer” computers in a network to transfer files between systems in a more efficient way. This time, however, those files weren’t going to be illegal downloads; the media companies were going to supply the files themselves. Kalanick would convince the RIAA and MPAA and others to hire Red Swoosh to deliver multimedia files—videos, music, whatever—to paying customers via set-top boxes on their TVs, or to their home computers.

>  At one point, when Red Swoosh was running out of money, an employee dipped into the company’s payroll tax withholdings—money a company reserves to pay the IRS the taxes it owes—to fund operations. That employee left the company, and Kalanick was stuck with the blame. He was later informed by an advisor that the company might be committing tax fraud. This would stick with Kalanick for years; he felt betrayed, put in legal jeopardy by a colleague.§ It would form the basis for his difficulty trusting people close to him for years to come.

>  Red Swoosh barely scraped by, but somehow he kept the place running. Cashflow was a month-to-month adventure. He scored a $ 150,000 deal from a cable and telecommunications company just two weeks before he was set to go out of business. It was painful and desperate, but Kalanick eventually came to appreciate the experience. It taught him how to negotiate from a position of weakness.

>  One VC firm made Red Swoosh a promise of a $ 10 million investment, but it never materialized, eventually falling apart after the venture capitalists couldn’t agree on other investors to join the funding round. Once again, Kalanick felt he got screwed by VCs who didn’t care about him or his company.

>  Finally, in 2005, Kalanick caught a break. Kalanick got into a flame war on a message board with Marc Cuban, the celebrity billionaire investor and owner of the Dallas Mavericks. Kalanick evangelized peer-to-peer tech, while Cuban thought Kalanick was dead wrong. Though Cuban didn’t like the tech, he did like Kalanick’s hustle, the tenacity he saw in Kalanick during the pitch. Cuban sent Kalanick a private message, offering him money to invest $ 1.8 million in the company. That was a crucial lifeline which eventually led to more contracts with important partners. Another investment from August Capital, a respected Valley firm, pumped even more life into the company.

>  Jobs chopped the air with his hand. “No. Stop it right there. I don’t want a wave of shitty apps from outsiders polluting this phone. Not going to happen.”

>  What if he didn’t have to spend his nights dialing for cabbies? What if there was an app for that? And most importantly: What if, like James Bond, he could look like a total badass using it?

>  Kalanick wanted to be a fixer like The Wolf. After buying his hilltop house in the Castro, Kalanick started investing small amounts of money in various startups with the understanding that he’d be available as their own personal fixer, willing to swoop in and solve problems whenever a founder needed his help.

>  Gurley’s biggest talent was his willingness to be a contrarian. In the heady days of the late nineties, when tech analysts like Gurley were often seen as glorified internet stock boosters, Gurley cut a path for himself by bucking against trends. His most notorious call at Deutsche Bank was his infamous report on Netscape, the first web browser and early internet pioneer. Most analysts rated Netscape positively, even as Microsoft readied its Internet Explorer browser for market—and promised to distribute it free of charge. Gurley saw this as a threat to Netscape’s browser dominance, and, unlike other analysts, worried about how Netscape would execute its business decisions under pressure from Microsoft. He thought Netscape’s shares were overvalued, and downgraded the stock. Netscape shares plunged nearly 20 percent the next day. Netscape never fully recovered.**

>  Kevin Harvey, a founding partner at Benchmark, took Gurley hunting. While in the woods together, Harvey got to see Gurley’s analytical mind at work. But what stuck out most for Harvey was Gurley’s tenacity. “He’s kind of an animal,” Harvey told his partners. As the two sat in the bush, Harvey watched Gurley spring to his feet, jump over a steep cliff, and scramble down a hill after a wild boar they were tracking, something that Harvey wasn’t willing to do. “He thought I was kind of lazy ’cause I didn’t want to.”

>  Gurley didn’t rely on expensive gimmicks alone. He gave impeccable guidance, answering calls from a founder at 11: 30 at night, after his kids were asleep and he was near dozing himself, to talk strategy or walk a young entrepreneur off some panicked ledge. Gurley competed for the most important deals. And more often than not, he won.

>  Benchmark had been looking for a ride-hailing or taxi-based business to invest in for some time. Gurley had already been meeting with companies like Cabulous, Taxi Magic, and a handful of other San Francisco–based ride-hailing companies. A popular ride-hailing company could quickly produce what technologists call a “network effect”—a shorter way of saying “the more people that use a service, the more beneficial it is to everyone else over time.”

>  But each new city required capital, an upfront investment to kickstart what they called the demand “flywheel.” Drivers wouldn’t work for Uber unless there was enough demand from riders. And new riders wouldn’t sign up or return unless there was a critical mass of available drivers. It was a classic chicken-and-egg problem. “Uber solved that problem by straight-up buying the chicken,” Ilya Abyzov, an early Uber manager in San Francisco, told friends of the strategy. Uber began torching hundreds of thousands of dollars, giving away the money as driver subsidies. They paid bonus cash when a driver completed a certain number of rides or drove for a certain number of days. Uber would also flood the rider side of the market with cash, doling out thousands of dollars in free rides to new customers. Their theory was, if we can get people to use our service, they’ll see how amazing it is and won’t want to stop.

>  Krane and his partners made a first-class presentation to Kalanick and Michael at Uber headquarters. They vowed to give Uber all kinds of support, be it by helping to recruit talented executives from GV’s vast network, or offering GV’s deep strategic experience. All of that, plus a yachtful of money. Krane and his partners did well. They convinced Uber to do the deal. Then Kalanick gave them the numbers: Uber, he said, wanted to raise $ 250 million from a single investor, valuing the company at a whopping $ 3.5 billion.

>  But this Uber scenario was different. Google Ventures was being asked to write a quarter-billion-dollar check—a substantial chunk of the capital in the entire fund—to just one company. And it was being told it should be grateful for the chance. Krane and his partners were not used to this. After a prolonged back and forth, Krane convinced his partners to bite the bullet. They cut the single biggest check GV has ever written to a portfolio company—and they were treated just like everyone else.

>  But he was also shrewd. When Google bought 510 Systems, Levandowski sold it for just under the amount that would have required him to share the profits with the fifty or so employees under him, depriving dozens of his colleagues of a rich payday. Even worse, Google hired less than half of 510 Systems’ staff. The rest had little to show for their time spent working on Levandowski’s robots.

>  Levandowski’s leadership style often irritated other Googlers. He had sharp elbows, was pushy, tough on people, sneering when someone disagreed with him. While Google was careful and methodical, employees saw Levandowski as corner-cutting and occasionally reckless. Without telling his bosses, Levandowski hired an outside lobbyist in Nevada to write a new law that allowed autonomous vehicles to operate in the state without a backup safety driver. Google executives were furious, yet the law passed statewide in 2011.

>  Eventually, taxi drivers targeted Lucini. They plastered posters with a photo of her face on taxi stands across the city, along with the phrase “I love to steal.” On another occasion, cabbies threw eggs at her during a press conference. And one night when Lucini was returning home from work, she found a sign hung from a power line not far from her apartment. On the sign was Lucini’s home address, and a message calling her a prostitute who provided her “services” to Milan’s transportation chief.

>  If transit authorities began policing transportation laws, local managers would blast emails and text messages to their driver corps, telling them Uber had their back. Kalanick viewed fines and tickets as just another cost of doing business. Text messages, like the one below, often promised full restitution from Uber if you happened to, say, have your car impounded by the police: UBERX: REMINDER: If you are ticketed by the PPA, CALL US at XXX-XXX-XXXX. You have 100% of our support anytime you are on the road using Uber—we are here for you, and we will get you home safe. All costs associated will be covered by us. Thank you for committing to providing safe, reliable rides to the citizens of Philadelphia. Uber-ON!

>  Uber spared no expense on local lobbying campaigns. The company regularly topped the list of biggest spenders across states like New York, Texas, and Colorado—and dozens of others where they faced legislative opposition—throwing down tens of millions of dollars annually to sway lawmakers. David Plouffe, a former Obama administration political operative, was a major hire who knew how to influence city-level as well as national politics. In Portland, Uber hired Mark Weiner, one of the most powerful political consultants in the city. In Austin, Uber and Lyft paid $ 50,000 to the former Democratic mayor to lead their campaign against regulation. Later, as Uber matured, the company’s staff swelled to include nearly four hundred paid lobbyists across forty-four states; the number of ride-hailing lobbyists outnumbered the paid lobbying staffs of Amazon, Microsoft, and Walmart combined.

>  In New York in 2015, when Mayor Bill de Blasio threatened to cap the number of cars on the road, Uber tweaked the software inside of its app for New York based riders to show what it called “De Blasio’s Uber.” That option showed fewer animated cars driving around on the mini-map inside the Uber app, with approximate wait times of up to a half hour—five to six times longer than people usually had to wait for a ride. “This is what Uber will look like in NYC if Mayor de Blasio’s Uber Cap Bill passes,” said the text inside a small, pop-up notification. Users were invited to “take action,” and were presented with a button inside the app that emailed the mayor and the city council directly with a form letter prewritten by Uber. By the end of the campaign, the mayor’s office had received thousands of letters from upset users protesting the potential ban. De Blasio ended up shelving the proposal.‡‡‡‡

>  In a tense gathering with other Uber colleagues, this man called another employee a “faggot,” something he never answered for despite employee complaints. Kalanick’s protection meant you did not face consequences. Other managers would threaten to demote workers if they didn’t perform well enough. One manager in Rio would scream or throw coffee mugs at subordinates when he was upset. Workers were threatened by managers with baseball bats if they didn’t meet targets. Once, this manager berated an employee about his performance so intensely, he made the man cry in front of the entire office. That same manager later dated one of his direct reports, causing discomfort among staff when he started favoring her in the workplace. Yet because Rio de Janeiro was one of Uber’s top performing markets, the numerous HR complaints about that manager went unresolved. To leadership, nothing mattered—as long as you made your numbers.

>  The reality was much less noble. As Uber’s insurance costs grew exponentially, the “Safe Rides Fee” was devised to add $ 1 of pure margin to each trip, according to employees who worked on the addition. That meant for each trip taken in the United States, Uber took in an extra dollar in cash. The drivers, of course, got no share of the extra buck. That number added up to hundreds of millions of dollars over years of operation, a sizeable new line of income.

>  Discussions with Schildkrout often ended up in the realm of the philosophical; he studied social theory at Harvard and the University of Chicago, and loved to think about why humans did things, not just what they did. Before Uber, Schildkrout had been a CEO of his own company, a dating startup, and he learned valuable lessons over his few years as a leader. One of the most important was knowing when a CEO needed challenging.

>  But BD wasn’t prepared for what Ola and taxi companies would do to push back. In Mumbai, local taxi operators muscled up at Uber’s offices and tried to intimidate employees. Violence was not uncommon; in Bangalore, whenever BD took a ride home from work, he refused to let Uber drivers take him directly to his house; he knew competitors might follow him. In Hyderabad, one Uber driver committed suicide after he wasn’t able to make his car loan payments on time. An angry mob of drivers—some who drove for Uber, others employed by taxi organizations all too happy to stoke anger—showed up outside of Uber’s offices in early 2017 with the dead body of the thirty-four-year-old driver, M Kondaiah, dumping the corpse on the company’s front doorstep. If Uber’s wages for drivers in India weren’t so low, the group claimed, Kondaiah would still be alive today.

>  All of this—the losses, the corporate subterfuge, the nonstop bare-knuckle street fighting, the literal violence—had an effect on Kalanick’s psyche. Kalanick was already a tense, competitive person. But China and Southeast Asia only served to grow his persecution complex. He began to feel that he was always being sabotaged or that friends or employees were trying to deceive him and harm the company. After the war for China, Kalanick’s cynicism would spread to other parts of the business; it would never subside.

>  InAuth code installed, Quentin watched the fraud numbers fall off a cliff. When a scammer tried to create a new account on a device Uber had fingerprinted, Uber’s anti-fraud systems would kick in and the account would be banned automatically. Finally, after years of being ripped off, Uber had found a way to fight back. There was one problem: InAuth’s service blatantly violated Apple’s rules regarding user privacy. So everything between Uber and InAuth had to be kept secret. if Apple found out, both Uber and InAuth could be in serious trouble, and could even get Uber’s app banned from the iPhone.

>  Back at Uber headquarters in San Francisco, the company’s engineers were scrambling to overcome the constant App Store rejections. In typical Apple fashion, each denial came without a real explanation why Apple had turned Uber down. Uber employees knew it was probably about InAuth’s code, but didn’t want to tip their hand if Apple hadn’t discovered it. After a long brainstorming session between members of Uber’s fraud and mobile teams, one frustrated mobile engineer stood up. The engineer, a previous Apple employee, knew how Uber could get around the App Store problem. “I have an idea,” he said, before walking out of the conference room and back to the laptop on his desk. “I can handle this.”

>  Sullivan’s tactics were best exemplified one weekend during his time at Facebook, when he got a frantic call from a friend, a female co-worker from Facebook. She had been browsing Match.com one evening, looking for a date, when things started heating up with a construction worker from San Jose. As the flirting went on, she sent the man a topless photo. The stranger’s next message alarmed her: the man told her he had researched her background, and knew she worked at a famous Silicon Valley company. If she didn’t wire him $ 10,000 cash, he threatened to email the topless photo to her entire company. Sullivan knew what to do. He and a colleague took control of her Match.com account, and attempted to lure the blackmailer into revealing his identity. The best way, Sullivan knew, was to push the scammer toward a payment system. For digital detectives like Sullivan, online payments often provided the best chance at finding clues to an attacker’s identity.

>  Months before Sullivan joined Uber, he helped the company clean up the mess around the breach of its systems; Uber reported the breach, as is legally required of companies, in February 2015—nine months after the hack had happened. It would not be the company’s last data breach; another attacker would crack Uber’s systems in 2016. It would, however, be the last time Sullivan and Kalanick would come forward voluntarily to admit Uber had been hacked. The decision to keep quiet would prove more costly than either man could have imagined. But by the time Sullivan arrived at Uber in April 2015, he realized he had a much bigger problem on his hands than fraud or thievery. He needed to keep Uber’s drivers from getting murdered.

>  When the startup was ready to film a demo of its self-driving hardware kit—which could be fitted, off-the-shelf, to existing big-rig trucks—Levandowski called the lobbyist who convinced Nevada regulators to write a new law for Google self-driving cars, and had him request a permit for Otto to film on a stretch of highway in the state. After the Nevada Department of Motor Vehicles declined his request, Levandowski ignored them and filmed it anyway. The sweeping, aerial views of a stark-white eighteen-wheeler dotted with Otto’s black signage stood out marvelously against the warm tones of the Mojave Desert. A regulator grumbled that Levandowski’s move was illegal. He never faced any actual consequences. For Levandowski, it was worth it: everyone who saw the launch video loved it. If he had played by the rules, as he had mostly done at Google, he’d still be waiting for approval. Inside Otto, engineers printed out orange-colored stickers and pasted them around the San Francisco headquarters with a message they knew Levandowski would love: “Safety Third.”

>  Drivers, as a result, felt they were disposable to Uber. And in truth, they were. In internal presentations, product managers would stress that “satisfaction ratings” among drivers—already low—had plummeted in early 2016. Roughly a quarter of Uber’s drivers churned out every three months. People hated driving for Uber so much, the company had to recruit new drivers from the widest labor pools possible. That included the obvious, like Lyft and taxi drivers, and the not-so-obvious, like minimum wage–earning workers at McDonald’s, Wal-Mart, even entry-level employees at Jeff Jones’s alma mater, Targét.

>  His thinking on keeping his seat on the council didn’t last long. In the span of a week, more than 500,000 people deleted their Uber accounts entirely, not counting the incalculable others who simply deleted the app from their phones. Uber’s all-important ridership growth curves—for years always hockey-sticking up and to the right—started turning downward. Kalanick began to sweat. Lyft, at that point running out of money and on the verge of surrender, benefitted enormously from the backlash. People began to ditch Uber and switch over to Lyft. (Protest felt good, but people still needed to be able to call a car sometimes.) Lyft’s executives then pulled a well-executed PR stunt, publicly donating $ 1 million to the American Civil Liberties Union over four years, making themselves look like white knights while Uber was groveling before Trump.

>  It wasn’t all easy; she fumbled through a first semester at Penn, and advisors—skeptical of her education from the “Home School of Susan Fowler,” attempted to steer her away from studying physics. Fowler wasn’t having it. She called on the president of Penn, Amy Gutmann, and left a message with her office. Her dream, Fowler said, was to study physics at an Ivy League university. And Gutmann said in a commencement speech that Penn would help students fulfill their dreams. Gutmann acquiesced. The president told Fowler she was absolutely right, and encouraged Fowler to press on. After the rough start, Fowler regained her footing, eventually graduating in 2014 with a degree in physics and philosophy.

>  Often, the emphasis on growth created unintended side effects, or “negative externalities,” in management-speak. Managers would pursue growth even if it led to staggering inefficiency in other parts of the business. For example: In Uber’s earliest days, the company sent free iPhone 4 devices to all new drivers. In order to get drivers on the road as quickly as possible, managers started sending out iPhone 4s as soon as someone signed up. But some eager managers began mailing phones out before drivers passed their background checks or completed other paperwork. Growth of new drivers exploded, which made the managers in charge look better. But so did a rash of iPhone thefts and fraudulent sign ups, costing the company dearly in what amounted to free iPhone giveaways to scammers.

>  Thousands of new drivers came onto the platform, and the managers in charge were given hefty rewards for the idea. It was the ride-hailing equivalent of a subprime mortgage. And just like 2008, the negative consequences came soon after. Uber noticed that the rate of safety incidents spiked after the company began the Xchange leasing program. They later figured out that many of the Xchange leasing drivers—those with poor or nonexistent credit histories—were the ones responsible for these incidents, which ranged from speeding tickets to sexual assault. The managers had created a moral hazard, indirectly causing pain for thousands, and potentially triggering a public relations and legal nightmare.

>  Weeks later, the six remaining women in Fowler’s division, including Fowler, received an email. The director told the group of women that they wouldn’t be getting leather jackets after all; Uber got a group discount on the 120 men’s jackets they were able to find. But since there were so few women in the organization, they weren’t able to find a bulk rate. That lack of a deal, the director said, made it untenable to justify placing a jacket order for the six women in the organization. Fowler, shocked at the decision, pushed back. It just wasn’t fair. The director’s reply was blunt. “If we women really wanted equality, then we should realize we were getting equality by not getting the leather jackets,” she was told. In the director’s mind, making special accommodations for women demeaned them, undermining the meritocracy. The director would do the same thing if the roles were reversed and men were the ones to miss out on the jackets; it didn’t occur to him that, in male-dominated Silicon Valley, that scenario would never occur.

>  During the Monday morning meeting with Kalanick and the rest of the leadership team, Whetstone offered advice Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of Google, had told her years ago: “Once you bring in outsiders, it’s the fastest way to lose control.” It was one thing for Uber to root around in its own garbage and discipline or fire employees. It was another to bring in some of the best lawyers in the country and tell them to have at it. Fresh, inquisitive eyes would surely unearth new, horrifying skeletons. Even so, it was Whetstone who first mentioned the possibility of bringing Holder on; if Uber was going to bring in outside investigators, she thought, it should be someone like him. Travis needed no convincing. He had been upset after reading Fowler’s post and wanted it handled immediately.

>  She was a master of reinvention. In her earlier years she explored mysticism, later on came meditation. After years as a Republican, she did an about-face and fashioned herself a progressive, embracing eco-friendly policies and supporting John Kerry’s presidential run.

>  “Is it possible to come up with a unified theory of Arianna?” one writer said of Huffington in 2006, while reviewing her eleventh book. “What does she believe?” At sixty-six, after being edged out of power within AOL, she moved into personal care and health, launching a lifestyle brand, Thrive Global, and promoting a new book. “There are two schools of thought about Arianna,” Mort Janklow, a former agent to Huffington for her Picasso book, told Vanity Fair in 1994. “One is that it’s all deliberate and calculated and she’s ruthless. The other is that she really convinces herself beforehand. She sells herself first.”

>  The group came up with what it believed Uber’s image was to outsiders, written in bold, black ink: A bunch of young bro bullies that have achieved ridiculous success. It was a hard point to argue. Nonetheless, Kalanick began to push back on Jones’s findings immediately, rebutting the data he saw on the wall. “Nuh-uh,” Kalanick said. “I don’t believe it, man. I don’t see it.” His lieutenants were flabbergasted. Even in the midst of the most sustained set of crises in Uber’s history, Kalanick couldn’t see the literal writing on the wall. Aaron Schildkrout, who led Uber’s driver product development, leapt to defend Jones and the data.

>  Kalanick lashed out, directing his anger toward Whetstone and Hazelbaker. “You two aren’t strategic or creative enough to help us get out of this situation,” he said. The room was silent as Kalanick’s insult hung in the air. Whetstone and Hazelbaker had had enough. The two of them stood up, gathered their belongings, and walked out of the room. Kalanick soon realized his mistake: he had pissed off the very people trying to protect him from a press corps that was about to tear him apart. As he chased his communications executives down the hotel hallway to try and convince them to stay, Hazelbaker confronted him. “How dare you!” she screamed, inches from Kalanick’s face, as the rest of the group watched in shock. “I’ve walked through fire for you and this company! You did this TO YOURSELF!”¶¶¶¶¶¶¶

>  But as a parting gift, Rubenstein offered two pieces of advice: First, Kalanick had to “find his Sheryl,” a reference to Mark Zuckerberg’s relationship with Sheryl Sandberg, then widely considered a competent counterbalance to Zuck’s leadership. Second, he said Kalanick needed to take a leave of absence. “You either shoot yourself in the foot, or the press will end up shooting you in the head.”

>  But Kalanick’s motives went beyond utility. Photographing Jean Liu at the exact moment she learned of Uber’s $ 3.5-billion Saudi investment—that was revenge for the pain DiDi had caused him in China. People close to Kalanick said DiDi’s infiltration of his own ranks had changed something in the Uber CEO. After China, he harbored a constant, creeping suspicion that others were trying to blind him or trick him. Kalanick believed his spies could gather the data he needed to make sense of the ongoing fights.

>  It was a message from a founder that made Gurley realize just how bad things were. One afternoon that summer, as Gurley was checking his inbox, a new email popped up on his screen. It was from Katrina Lake, the chief executive of Stitch Fix, a much-loved, successful e-commerce company that sold personally styled outfits to customers over the internet.

>  Lake’s email was brusque. “It’s demoralizing and sad that something like Uber can even exist and even thrive,” she wrote. “And I’m disappointed that someone I respect so much has had a part in it.”

>  Whenever Camp, Graves, or anyone else in Kalanick’s orbit began to chafe at his actions, he usually responded with some version of the same placative sentiment: “Do you know how much money I’m going to make you?” The line almost always worked.

>  Over the six weeks they had been discussing the plans together, their mantra to outsiders, to each other, was the same: “We have done all we can.” It had come to this only because they had exhausted all other options. As daylight waned in the conference room, Gurley looked around the room at his partners and nodded. He was anxious. But he was resigned. “I really think we’re on the right side of history here,” Gurley said.

>  Back in Woodside, the members of the syndicate were all in shock. Someone had leaked the entire story to the Times. In the end, all they wanted was Kalanick’s resignation, not his embarrassment. Somehow, in the scrum of the past forty-eight hours, things had gone sideways. There was a sense of guilt among the syndicate. But outweighing the guilt was something greater: a sense of relief. Travis Kalanick was no longer the chief executive of Uber.

>  At the end of June, Kalanick boarded a plane to Pape’ete, the capital of French Polynesia, where he spent a week off the coast recuperating on Diller’s yacht, the Eos. The yacht—the second-largest of its kind in the world—was named for the Greek goddess who opens the gates of heaven for the sun each morning. Celebrities and friends cycled on and off Diller’s boat, which sleeps sixteen (served by twenty crew), and others moored nearby. The visitors came and went, but the ex-CEO stayed for weeks. Kalanick’s only consolation was an empathetic von Furstenberg, who tried her best to cheer him up.

>  His firm had spent weeks grooming Whitman to take the CEO job, only to have her nuke her own candidacy in public at the last moment. Kalanick, refreshed and geared for war, had begun to play dirty—just as Gurley had feared.

>  Then, some believe, Cohler made a miscalculation. The Benchmark partner gave the table an ultimatum: If the board voted for Whitman, Benchmark would drop its lawsuit against Kalanick. It read to the room as an ultimatum. This was the price of peace. For once, Kalanick wasn’t the only one who directors felt was acting childish. Cohler’s brinksmanship dismayed almost everyone in the room. Instead of following a fair process to determine the best candidate, Benchmark was effectively holding the board hostage to approve the candidate of their choice.

>  Cohler’s speech may have cost Whitman the job. After the next secret ballot, the votes came in again, but this time it was not deadlocked. It was five to three in favor of Khosrowshahi. The group had chosen Uber’s next CEO. To give the process some semblance of cohesion, the board had agreed that whoever won, they would cast one final ballot and all unanimously vote for the same candidate. That way, when they finally announced the decision to the public, the board could pretend it had been united the entire time.

>  “Hello, Dara?” Huffington said, in her unmistakable Greek accent. “Dara, I have good news and I have bad news for you.” Khosrowshahi listened, chuckling into the phone. “Dara, the good news is that you are Uber’s next CEO. The bad news is that it has already leaked.”

>  Over the next eighteen months, Uber’s new chief executive Dara Khosrowshahi would systematically undo nearly everything his predecessor had stood for.

>  Khosrowshahi also began recruiting his own lieutenants. Where Kalanick had Emil Michael, Khosrowshahi hired Barney Harford, an Expedia executive and longtime trusted colleague, as Uber’s chief operating officer.§§§§§§§§§§ Where Kalanick managed all of the company’s finances himself, Khosrowshahi hired Nelson Chai, a former Merrill Lynch executive, as the new CFO, who investors hoped would help get Uber back to a place of fiscal responsibility. Ronald Sugar, a former chief executive of the defense contracting firm Northrop Grumman, joined Uber’s board of directors as its independent chairman, another position that was vacant until Khosrowshahi started at the company. And by hiring Tony West, a former associate attorney general at the Department of Justice, Khosrowshahi made clear that Uber was going to take its legal and compliance obligations seriously. For the first time in its nine-year history, Uber had installed proper corporate governance—mechanisms and officers that Bill Gurley had long desired.

