---
title: Rabois
category: archive
layout: post
tags:
- excellence
- startups
- venture
- rabois
- square
- paypal
- foundersfund
- apple
- khosla
- greatness
- investing
---

I’ve been a Keith Rabois fan for a long time. In both startups & venture it’s often easier to follow rather than lead in thought and in action. And despite getting increasingly famous over the past few years, it’s been great to see Keith continuing to be himself online — irreverent, opinionated, and frequently right.

I've found myself several times turning to Keith's content to help think through problems. By now I’ve read most of his written content, listened to interviews/podcasts, etc and felt like I had decent sense of what some of Keith’s mental models are (at least ones he talks about publicly). So I wrote them down for myself. Here they are. 

#### How To Be Great

**Emulate success.** To be great it’s not enough just to avoid mistakes. You also have to learn to emulate those that are already great. Keith often talks about Apple in this light — he learned from them how to be opinionated about design, why it’s important to own the entire stack to guarantee a good end user experience, and how to obsess over details.

**Learn through osmosis.** One of the best ways to accelerate your careers is not by picking a good startup to work at, but by picking a good boss. If the best investors have a tough time picking the right startups, the chances you’ll be able to are super small. So pick a great boss and just learn as much as you can through osmosis. An added benefit is that in the future they’ll likely pull you into other good opportunities too.

**Be the best in the world at something.** Keith talks about defining your unique value prop as a person. What are you the best at? He uses his own example of being a BD person who also had reasonable product sense early in his career. Later on at Square it was a combination of his understanding of financial services plus an entrepreneurial bent that set him apart.

**Hard work.** Not everyone needs to work hard. But if you want to be great or change the world, there’s no magic. It’s just hard work. And that means sacrifice. You have to optimize for a single variable and then throw all of your energy behind it. Which means for highly ambitious people, work life balance usually doesn’t work out.

#### On Management

**Every business is an equation.** Every business can be expressed as a simple equation. The best execs deeply understand the equation and regardless of where they sit in it, they can express what happens across the business when you dial certain variables up and down. This is similar in concept to the [Drake Equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drake_equation) that I learned from [Michael Dearing](https://twitter.com/mcgd).

**The team you build is the company you build.** Keith spends a lot of time talking about this, but it’s a really important point. Having the right people in your company is such an important part of building a long lasting and enduring business. Very similar to a Patrick Collison quote about how the first 10 people are extra important because they each replicate themselves 10x.

**Find undiscovered talent.** Something Keith picked up from Peter Thiel is the idea that you need to get good at spotting talented folks before the market recognizes them. That usually means that they’re young, inexperienced, or come from a strange background. Otherwise their skills will reflect in their experience and also in their price. But when you catch them early, you get disproportionate payoffs.

**Most great people are ammo. But you need barrels.** One of my favorite talks about management is [Keith’s lecture from YC’s startup school series](https://startupclass.samaltman.com/courses/lec14/). He draws a distinction between ammo and barrels. Barrels are those that increase the velocity in a company. They can take an idea from start to finish and bring people along with them. So as you grow make sure you add more barrels.

**Delegate through a 2x2 matrix of conviction and importance..** In the same talk he goes into this 2x2 matrix. This was such a useful framework that I’ve already written about it, [post here](http://www.chrisyin.com/blog/2015/01/14/how-to-delegate).

#### On Investing

**What is anomalous?** Every great investment has to have something anomalous. Metrics, the idea, the team, etc. If it’s not there is no chance that it will be one of the top 100 companies of all time.

**People who succeed have a screw loose in at least 1 or 2 dimensions.** The actual quote is: “I think most people who succeed at changing the world, have extreme talent in at least one or two dimensions, then have a screw loose in at least one or two dimensions.”

**Venture is like baseball.** Similar to baseball, venture is both an individual and a team sport. Individual in the sense that everyone has an individual track record and stats are measured individually, but ultimately you are working with other people in the firm and you both win and lose together.

**Investing is like playing psychologist.** Instead of making lots of decisions and being deep in the guts of operating a company, investing is much more like playing psychologist. What Keith often does is play back what the CEO is saying to him and helps them see their own reflection as opposed to imposing his own opinions on them.