---
title: More Money Than God - Hedge Funds and the Making of a New Elite
category: reading
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Sebastian Mallaby
layout: bookpost
tags:
- finance
- hedgefunds
- georgesoros
- trading
- investing
- history
---

>  The lesson is that genius does not always understand itself—a lesson, incidentally, that is not confined to finance. “Out of all the research that we’ve done with top players, we haven’t found a single player who is consistent in knowing and explaining exactly what he does,” the legendary tennis coach Vic Braden once complained. “They give different answers at different times, or they have answers that simply are not meaningful.” 7

>  “If the efficient markets hypothesis was a publicly traded security, its price would be enormously volatile,” the Harvard economists Andrei Shleifer and Lawrence Summers wrote mockingly in 1990. “But the stock in the efficient markets hypothesis—at least as it has traditionally been formulated—crashed along with the rest of the market on October 19, 1987.” 8

>  The crisis has also shown that financial firms are riddled with dysfunctional incentives. The clearest problem is “too big to fail”—Wall Street behemoths load up on risk because they expect taxpayers to bail them out, and other market players are happy to abet this recklessness because they also believe in the government backstop.

>  The average hedge fund borrows only one or two times its investors’ capital, and even those that are considered highly leveraged generally borrow less than ten times. Meanwhile investment banks such as Goldman Sachs or Lehman Brothers were leveraged thirty to one before the crisis, and commercial banks like Citi were even higher by some measures.

>  In 1949, when Jones invented his “hedged fund,” the profession of money management was dominated by starchy, conservative types, known tellingly as “trustees”—their job was merely to conserve capital, not to seek to grow it. The leading money-management companies had names like Fidelity and Prudential, and they behaved that way too: A good trustee was, in the words of the writer John Brooks, “a model of unassailable probity and sobriety; his white hair neatly but not too neatly combed; his blue Yankee eyes untwinkling.” 5 But Jones was cut from different cloth.

>  Jones believed that investor emotions created trends in stock prices. A rise in the stock market generates investor optimism, which in turn generates a further rise in the market, which generates further optimism, and so on; and this feedback loop drives stock prices up, creating a trend that can be followed profitably. The trick is to bail out at the moment when the psychology turns around—when the feedback loop has driven prices to an unsustainable level, and greed turns to fear, and there is a reversal of the pendulum.

>  But, now in his late forties, with two children and expensive New York tastes, he decided that he needed money. 22 His efforts to earn more in journalism had fizzled: He had left the staff of Fortune hoping to launch a new magazine, but two blueprints had failed to attract financial backing. Stymied in these publishing ventures, Jones moved to plan B. He raised $ 60,000 from four friends and put up $ 40,000 of his own to try his hand at investing.

>  The standard practice for professional investors was to load up with stocks when the market was expected to go up and to hold a lot of cash when it was expected to topple. But Jones improved on these options. When the charts signaled a bull market, he did not merely put 100 percent of his fund into stocks; he borrowed in order to be, say, 150 percent “long”—meaning that he owned stocks worth one and a half times the value of his capital. When the charts signaled trouble, on the other hand, Jones did not merely retreat to cash. He reduced his exposure by selling stocks “short”—borrowing them from other investors and selling them in the expectation that their price would fall, at which point they could be repurchased at a profit.

>  Jones’s innovation was to see how these methods could be combined without any raciness at all—he used “speculative means for conservative ends,” as he said frequently. By selling a portion of his fund short as a routine precaution, even when the charts weren’t signaling a fall, Jones could insure his portfolio against market risk.

>  So Jones measured the volatility of all stocks—he called it the “velocity”—and compared it with the volatility of Standard &amp; Poor’s 500 Index. 32 For example, he examined the significant price swings in Sears Roebuck since 1948 and determined that these were 80 percent as big as the swings in the market average: He therefore assigned Sears a “relative velocity” of 80. On the other hand, some stocks were more volatile than the broad market: General Dynamics had a relative velocity of 196.

>  Jones pointed out that the velocity of a stock did not determine whether it was a good investment. A slow-moving stock might be expected to do well; a volatile one might be expected to do poorly. But to understand a stock’s effect on a portfolio, the size of a holding had to be adjusted for its volatility.

>  Jones’s next innovation was to distinguish between the money that his fund made through stock picking and the money that it made through its exposure to the market. Years later, this distinction became commonplace: Investors called skill-driven stock-picking returns “alpha” and passive market exposure “beta.” 33 But Jones tracked the different sources of his profits from the start, revealing the facility with statistics he had honed amid Akron’s industrial tensions.

>  The author was a twenty-five-year-old graduate student named Harry Markowitz, and his chief insights were twofold: The art of investment is not merely to maximize return but to maximize risk-adjusted return, and the amount of risk that an investor takes depends not just on the stocks he owns but on the correlations among them.

>  Jones also anticipated the work of James Tobin, another Nobel Prize–winning father of modern portfolio theory. In 1958 Tobin proposed what came to be known as the separation theorem, which held that an investor’s choice of stocks should be separate from the question of his risk appetite.

>  It was Valentine who realized that if managers took a share of a hedge fund’s investment profits rather than a flat management fee, they could be taxed at the capital-gains rate: Given the personal tax rates of the times, that could mean handing 25 percent to Uncle Sam rather than 91 percent. 40 Jones duly charged his investors 20 percent of the upside, claiming that he had been inspired to do so by Mediterranean history rather than tax law: He told people that his profit share was modeled after Phoenician merchants, who kept a fifth of the profits from successful voyages, distributing the rest to their investors.

>  Jones’s reasons for secrecy went beyond a desire to stave off competitors and reduce tax: He was anxious to escape regulation. He declined to register under the Securities Act of 1933, the Investment Company Act of 1940, and the Investment Advisors Act of 1940, arguing that none of these laws applied to him, principally because his funds were “private.” Not registering under these laws was essential: They restricted investment funds from borrowing or selling short, the two central components of Jones’s hedging strategy, and also imposed fee restrictions.

>  the 1950s, Wall Street was a sleepy, unsophisticated place. At the universities and business schools, practically nobody took courses in finance; the investment course at Harvard was dubbed “Darkness at Noon,” because the university administrators allocated it the unpopular lunchtime slot in order to save classroom space for more popular subjects.

>  The trustees at the old investment institutions were compensated by the volume of assets under management rather than by a performance fee, and they reached decisions by committee. Jones’s method broke the mold. It was each stock picker for himself; it substituted individualism for collectivism and adrenaline for complacency.

>  Even in the 1960s, when Wall Street finally shrugged off its postcrash stupor, it was surprising how easily sheer diligence could set a man apart. Alan Dresher, one of the Jones stock pickers, had the idea of going over to the Securities and Exchange Commission offices to read company filings the moment they came out. The extraordinary thing was that he was all alone. The rest of the Street was waiting for the filings to arrive in a bundle from the post office.

>  The linking of compensation to results was the key to Jones’s formula. When a broker passed a stock tip to a normal mutual fund, there was no certain connection between the quality of the tip and what the broker would be paid for it. For one thing, the mutual funds lacked Jones’s system for tracking how stock recommendations turned out. For another, mutual-fund companies paid out thousands of dollars to salesmen who brought in investors’ capital, leaving little money over to reward excellent research. Jones, on the other hand, was meticulous in paying for good research ideas, and he paid handsomely. 49 A young broker could see his salary double if the recommendations in his model portfolio generated profits.

>  Each year successful segment managers were given extra capital to manage, which increased their chances of generating profits in the coming year and so earning a large bonus; unsuccessful managers received less capital to play with.

>  And in another innovation that anticipated the hedge funds of later times, Jones required his partners to have their own capital in the funds, so that their wealth as well as their income was riding on their performance.

>  Perhaps not surprisingly, the man who had spent his early adulthood among clandestine anti-Hitler activists never had much passion for investing. He disdained the monomaniacal market types with no interests beyond finance: “Too many men don’t want to do something after they make money. They just go on and make a lot more money,” he complained to one interviewer.

>  He had opened his hedged fund just as the trauma of the crash was beginning to wear off: In 1950 only one in twenty-five American adults owned stocks; by the end of the 1950s, one in eight did. 66 As retail brokerages sprang up on every high street, the S&amp; P 500 index rose from 15 at the time of Jones’s launch to a peak of 108 in late 1968, and meanwhile the financial culture changed: The trustee bankers were eclipsed by go-go types for whom the crash was ancient history.

>  But starting in the late 1960s, inflation tore this world apart. Having stayed below 2 percent in the first half of the decade, it hit 5.5 percent in the spring of 1969, forcing the Federal Reserve to jam on the monetary brakes and squeeze the life out of the stock market. The bear market that followed was only the first shock. In 1971 the Nixon administration was forced to acknowledge that inflation had eroded the real value of the dollar, and it responded by abandoning the gold standard. Suddenly money could be worth one thing today, another tomorrow; and the realization inevitably fueled further inflationary pressure. Another round of monetary tightening soon followed, and the market crashed again in 1973–74. Go-go was gone-gone. The 1960s were over.

>  Between the close of 1968 and September 30, 1970, the 28 largest hedge funds lost two thirds of their capital. 1 Their claim to be hedged turned out to be a bald-faced lie; they had racked up hot performance numbers by borrowing hard and riding the bull market. By January 1970, there were said to be only 150 hedge funds, down from between 200 and 500 one year before; and the crash of 1973–74 wiped out most of the rest of them.

>  When Fortune published its list of the top twenty-eight hedge funds that year, Steinhardt, Fine, Berkowitz was the only one to have actually expanded during the shakeout. The partnership had racked up a return of 361 percent since opening for business in July 1967, a performance that was thirty-six times better than that of the stock market index over that period.

>  In this climate, the old prejudice against short selling came back with a vengeance: Steinhardt, Fine, and Berkowitz were resented as arrogant, greedy, and even un-American; betting against American companies was portrayed as one step away from treason. 11 Thinking back on that period, Steinhardt recalls the vilification this way: “That was, for me, the height of professional satisfaction.” 12

>  THE SUCCESS OF STEINHARDT, FINE, BERKOWITZ DEMONSTRATED the capacity for contrarianism that marked later hedge funds. A. W. Jones had invented the hedge-fund structure to control market exposure. His go-go imitators had turned it into a way of maximizing market exposure. But the troika made it into something else—a vehicle for betting against conventional wisdom. Indeed, aggressive contrarianism became a sort of company credo, especially for Michael Steinhardt.

>  “I hate the pig,” said Steinhardt. “Mike, I don’t care how it looks on the tape. The results are going to be good and the stock’s going up.” Steinhardt’s contrarian radar flickered. “How much you want to buy then?” “How about ten thousand?” LeFrere ventured, calculating that, with IBM trading at $ 365, owning three and a half million dollars’ worth of one stock was about the maximum conceivable. Steinhardt hit a button and ordered his trader to buy 25,000 IBM immediately. “Mike, I said ten thousand,” LeFrere said anxiously. “How convinced are you of your fuckin’ opinion?” Steinhardt barked. “I’m very convinced.” “You better be right,” Steinhardt said grimly. He hit the button again and bought another 25,000. That exchange left Steinhardt with some $ 18 million worth of IBM, representing perhaps a quarter of his capital. It was a hefty concentration of risk in one stock, five times the size that LeFrere had recommended. But when IBM’s results came out at the end of the week, the stock shot up 20 points, yielding an instant profit of $ 1 million. LeFrere had survived his rite of passage. 14

>  Cilluffo’s main symptom was a superstitious eating habit. During times when the partnership was making money, he would order precisely the same lunch day after day, switching only when the markets turned; he ordered two toasted English muffins with jam for one two-year stretch, following that up with a long run of cream-cheese-and-olive sandwiches. 16 Meanwhile, he would gulp down gallons of coffee and invoke Kondratiev’s teachings, declaring with unwavering conviction that a particular stock that was then trading at $ 80 would hit $ 10 by next summer. Not all his colleagues knew how to respond. “He was either brilliant or crazy,” one of them recalls. “You can’t do four packs of Dunhills a day and eight cups of coffee without waking up at three in the morning and seeing pink elephants flying around.” But Steinhardt had great faith in Cilluffo. As he wrote later in his memoir, Tony “truly had a direct line to God (if indeed there was one).” 17

>  Cilluffo’s colleagues were only dimly aware of his insights because he was bad at explaining them. They knew, for example, that the wiry guy on the trading desk hated Kaufman &amp; Broad, the nation’s biggest home builder, and they knew that the firm was short 100,000 shares; they did not necessarily know that Cilluffo hated Kaufman because home builders are vulnerable to rising interest rates and the monetary data screamed that rates were heading upward. But Steinhardt saw to it that Cilluffo was empowered to test his views: He adored this guy’s conviction, and he didn’t care if others were baffled by his reasoning. The short position on Kaufman earned Steinhardt, Fine, Berkowitz over $ 2 million. And so, wittingly or otherwise, Cilluffo’s colleagues were the beneficiaries of his innovation: the application of monetary analysis to stock markets. 26

>  Before the big institutions came along, equity trading was dominated by “specialists” on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. When an individual wanted to sell 50 shares in Ford, his broker called the New York Stock Exchange market maker who specialized in that stock; having a feel for the deal flow, the specialist would buy the shares at a price slightly below what he could sell them for a bit later. But this simple system broke down with the rise of the pension funds and mutual funds; suddenly, these institutions wanted to trade Ford in 100,000-share blocks, and the specialists lacked the capital to swallow that much. And so an opportunity arose. A few enterprising brokers, led by Oppenheimer and Goldman Sachs, began to make markets themselves. Rather than taking block trades to the specialists, they began to handle them in-house, sometimes finding buyers among their clients and sometimes buying the stock with their own capital. In 1965 block trading of this sort accounted for less than 5 percent of the transactions on the New York Stock Exchange. By 1970 that share had tripled. 29

>  Block traders had figured out a new approach: They weren’t engaged in the overcrowded business of analyzing company data and picking the stocks that would do well; instead, they aimed to make money by supplying something that other investors needed—liquidity. The new institutional custodians of savings were looking to trade large blocks of stocks quickly and discreetly, and they were willing to pay the guy who made that possible. Steinhardt’s genius was to extract good fees for providing liquidity, as when he secured a hefty discount on a block of third-market stock; and at the same time to pay little or nothing to those who provided liquidity to him, as when he managed to off-load third-market stock at 12.5 cents above the market.

>  Moreover, the great beauty of Steinhardt’s method was that it was hard to copy. Once Wall Street had understood the mechanics of the A. W. Jones model, two hundred imitators had sprung up. But Steinhardt’s block-trading business was protected by “network effects,” which created barriers to entry. Steinhardt got the big calls from the block-trading brokers because he had a reputation for getting the big calls. He could trade his way out of big purchases because he had the network of broker relationships that came with being a big trader.

>  Steinhardt traded the markets as though he were fighting a war, and the effort exhausted him. In the fall of 1978, he took a sabbatical from his firm, declaring that his aim was to shrink his waistline and expand his head: to find meaning in life beyond wealth accumulation. Some said he might be leaving for good, but others had their doubts; “there’s as much chance of Michael giving up Wall Street for a year as there is of Vladimir Horowitz giving up the piano permanently,” one friend insisted.

>  beans to cover two years of Nabisco’s production. “You sure you know what you are doing?” Weymar’s boss demanded more than once; and Weymar projected as much confidence as he could while inwardly sweating bullets. But just as Weymar’s nerves were breaking, the African crops failed and cocoa prices almost doubled. Weymar sold back part of his stockpile at a vast profit. “This wasn’t a period of maximum modesty or self-doubt in my life,” he confessed later. 14

>  Weymar fed his cocoa model with a vast array of data. To anticipate the supply of cocoa before the West African growing countries reported officially on their harvests, he examined the correlation between weather and cocoa yields in the Ivory Coast and Ghana. By tracking rain and humidity patterns, he could predict the cocoa harvest, and hence cocoa supply, and hence, ultimately, prices. The start-up group also included Hans Kilian, a German who toured the African countryside in a Land Rover, surveying cocoa trees and recording the number, length, and condition of the pods.

>  The board of Commodities Corporation met in July 1971 and agreed to give Weymar a last chance: The firm would be closed if it lost another $ 100,000.17 In the bloodletting that followed, four of the original seven founding professionals, including Cootner, left the firm. But the recovery came soon, and it laid the foundations for one of the most successful trading operations of the era.

>  Marcus’s respect for trends reflected his experience. He had spent time on the floor of the cotton exchange early in his career and had watched traders respond to the tempo of their colleagues. Sometimes they would work one another up into a crescendo of shouting, and sometimes they would fall back, exhausted. If the price of a commodity headed up past its high point of the previous day, there was a decent chance that it would keep riding upward on a wave of excitement; so Marcus would take a large position at those crossover moments, protecting himself with a stop-loss order that would kick him out of the market if the trade went against him. Either the market took off and ran or Marcus was out: It was like mounting a surfboard, ready for the wave; if your timing was off, you just plopped back into the water. Like the storied hedge-fund traders who emulated this method later, Marcus reckoned that he caught the wave on less than half of his attempts. But his winning rides earned profits of twenty or thirty times the small losses he took when he got stopped out of his position.

>  of the converted. 31 Marcus’s determination not to specialize made him a natural pioneer in the new field of currency trading. Following Nixon’s abandonment of the dollar-gold link, Chicago’s Mercantile Exchange began trading futures in seven free-floating currencies in May 1972. Marcus quickly saw an opportunity to apply his surfing skills to a new beach; investor psychology could be counted upon to generate the same waves in currency markets as existed in commodities. By the mid-to late 1970s, about a third of Marcus’s trading was in currencies, and by the end of the decade, two thirds was. 32 Marcus’s colleagues at Commodities Corporation began to trade currencies as well, as did many of the independent traders whom the firm seeded. A new kind of hedge-fund player—the “macro” traders who became the scourge of central bankers in the 1980s and beyond—was starting to stir in the incongruous setting of a Princeton farmhouse.

>  The phenomenon was first and foremost a triumph of flexibility. In moving beyond econometric analysis to focus on trends, Weymar had demonstrated a pragmatism that crops up repeatedly in the history of hedge funds—and indeed in business history generally. Innovation is often ascribed to big theories fomented in universities and research parks: Thus Stanford’s engineering school stands at the center of Silicon Valley’s creativity, and the National Institutes of Health underpin innovation in the pharmaceutical industry. But the truth is that innovation frequently depends less on grand academic breakthroughs than on humble trial and error—on a willingness to go with what works, and never mind the theory that may underlie it.

>  Even in finance, a field in which research findings can be translated directly into business plans, trial and error turns out to be key. A. W. Jones started out expecting that chart following would allow him to call the broad market; this turned out to be a blind alley, but he succeeded by improvising a new system of incentives for stock pickers. Steinhardt, Fine, and Berkowitz started out as equity analysts. But their success owed much to block trading plus an eccentric focus on monetary policy.

>  Much like Michael Steinhardt’s troika, Commodities Corporation benefited from an approach that fit the 1970s. Financial markets are mechanisms for matching people who want to avoid risk with people who get paid to take it on: There is a transfer from insurance seeker to insurance seller.

>  This rush of insurance seekers into the market was bound to profit the insurance sellers—that is to say, the speculators. The farmers and the food companies were buying and selling futures because they needed to shed risk, not because they had a sophisticated view on the direction of prices; speculators who did have such a view were bound to have the upper hand in trading with them. Moreover, the speculators earned especially good profits because they faced relatively little competition. The exchanges imposed limits on the number of contracts a speculator could buy, thereby limiting the supply of “insurance” and boosting its value artificially.

>  The big jump in insurance seeking explains part of the success of Commodities Corporation. But the most important factor by far was the firm’s conversion to trend following. By developing his Technical Computer System and demonstrating how wrong the random walkers were, Frank Vannerson gave Commodities Corporation the confidence to hire trend followers such as Michael Marcus and to turn to his combination of fundamental analysis and charts into a sort of company credo. 42 Years later, financial academia caught up with Vannerson’s discovery. In 1986 a paper in the prestigious Journal of Finance found that trend following in the currency markets could earn sizable profits, and in 1988 another study found the same for commodities as well as currency futures.

>  Kovner’s encounter with Marcus and Weymar launched one of the most illustrious careers in hedge-fund history. Over the next decade, Kovner racked up gains averaging some 80 percent per year; he launched his own hedge fund, Caxton Corporation; and he emerged as a colorful figure in the arts and politics. He became a godfather of the conservative movement through his chairmanship of the American Enterprise Institute and his backing of the New York Sun. He chaired the Juilliard School of music and sponsored an artist who produced an illustrated edition of the Bible, the Pennyroyal Caxton, complete with an engraving of Kovner in the image of King Solomon. When Kovner needed a bachelor pad following a divorce, he converted Manhattan’s International Center of Photography into a private residence. The mansion has a vault for Kovner’s collection of rare books and a study that doubles as a radiation-proof bomb shelter.

>  Unlike many traders, Kovner combined a feel for the markets with organizational talent. He hired several assistants to track numbers and compose charts, never paying any of them more than was absolutely necessary. He could get the best out of ordinary people: He employed an ex-librarian to monitor the relationship between interest rates and gold futures; whenever the relationship showed an unusual blip, the librarian had instructions to bet on normalcy’s return, a formula that generated handsome profits. Meanwhile, Kovner was adept at extracting financial concessions from Weymar, frequently raising the hackles of colleagues.

>  Kovner combined fundamental analysis with attention to the charts, confirming the shift away from the model-driven research with which Weymar had started. 51 As with Michael Marcus, the charts sometimes came first: Indeed, Kovner once argued that the most profitable opportunities arise when you have no fundamental information. 52 If a market is behaving normally, ticking up and down within a narrow band, a sudden breakout in the absence of any discernible reason is an opportunity to jump: It means that some insider somewhere knows information that the market has yet to understand, and if you follow that insider you will get in there before the information becomes public.

>  Popper’s central contention was that human beings cannot know the truth; the best they can do is to grope at it through trial and error. This notion had an obvious appeal to someone of Soros’s background. It suggested that all political dogmas were flawed: The Nazism and communism inflicted upon Hungary by outside powers each claimed an intellectual certainty to which neither was entitled. Popper’s masterwork, The Open Society and Its Enemies, created in Soros a lifelong desire to make his own contribution to philosophy.

>  By now Soros had melded Karl Popper’s ideas with his own knowledge of finance, arriving at a synthesis that he called “reflexivity.” As Popper’s writings suggested, the details of a listed company were too complex for the human mind to understand, so investors relied on guesses and shortcuts that approximated reality. But Soros was also conscious that those shortcuts had the power to change reality as well, since bullish guesses would drive a stock price up, allowing the company to raise capital cheaply and boosting its performance. Because of this feedback loop, certainty was doubly elusive: To begin with, people are incapable of perceiving reality clearly; but on top of that, reality itself is affected by these unclear perceptions, which themselves shift constantly.

>  In an investment note written in 1970, Soros explained the workings of real-estate investment trusts in explicitly reflexive terms. “The conventional method of security analysis is to try to predict the future course of earnings,” he began; but in the case of these investment trusts, future earnings would themselves depend on investors’ perceptions about them. If investors were bullish, they would pay a premium for a share in a successful trust, injecting it with cheap capital. The cheap capital would boost earnings, which would in turn reinforce the appearance of success, persuading other investors to buy into the trust at an even greater premium. The trick, Soros insisted, was to focus neither on the course of earnings nor on the psychology that drove investors’ appetite. Rather, Soros homed in on the feedback loop between the two, predicting that each would drive the other forward until the trusts were so completely overvalued that a crash was inevitable.

>  He was willing to take the plunge without waiting for conclusive evidence that he was right. If he found an investment idea attractive on cursory examination, he figured that others would be seduced too; and since he believed that perfect cognition was impossible, there was no point in sweating the details. On a skiing vacation once in Switzerland, he bought the Financial Times at the bottom of the chairlift, read on the way up about the British government’s plan to bail out Rolls-Royce, and called his broker from the top of the mountain with an order to buy British government bonds. 8 Let specialists obsess about minutiae. Soros’s motto was “Invest first, investigate later.” 9

>  Soros was not above celebrating his own brilliance. “I stood back and looked at myself with awe: I saw a perfectly honed machine,” he wrote, with no apparent irony. 11 “I fancied myself as some kind of god or an economic reformer like Keynes (each with his General Theory),” he confessed on another occasion. “Or, even better, a scientist like Einstein (reflexivity sounds like relativity).” 12 But the tragedy was that he was not happy.

>  The business of investing consumed all the time and energy he had. He thought of himself as a boxer in training who had to sacrifice all personal life for the sake of victory. He compared himself to a sick person with a parasitic fund swelling inexorably inside his body.

>  Soros replaced the signals from his aching back with a more cerebral process. Starting in August 1985, he kept a diary of his investment thinking, hoping that the discipline of recording his thoughts would sharpen his judgments. The resulting “real-time experiment” is dense, repetitive, and filled with complex ruminations about scenarios that never in the end materialize. But because it is free of the biases that afflict retrospective explanations of success, it is a true portrait of the speculator at work.

>  Soros saw no point in knowing everything about a few stocks in the hope of anticipating small moves; the game was to know a little about a lot of things, so that you could spot the places where the big wave might be coming.

