---
title: VC - An American History
category: reading
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Tom Nicholas
layout: bookpost
tags:
- vc
- venturecapital
- history
- investing
- technology
- startups
- investors
- finance
---

>  By the nineteenth century, however, the United States had become the clear and unambiguous industry leader. By around 1850, almost 75 percent of the nine hundred whaling ships worldwide were American registered.

>  IN HIS 1977 CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY on possible modifications of the rules for pension fund investing (discussed in Chapter 5), David T. Morgenthaler made a perceptive observation about the venture capital industry and how its development should be considered in a much broader economic context. He argued that investment opportunities tend to “occur largely around university and research centers” and therefore that venture capitalists “are always concerned when our states fail to keep up in the research and development activities, or especially fail to get their share of Federal funds for research and development.” According to Morgenthaler, such funding failures disadvantage the VC industry because they often mean “there will be a falling off in the availability of venture opportunities.”

>  California received a large share of funding for a variety of reasons, including the fact that it was adept in technology areas related to wartime demand. Military purchases of microwave tubes, one of the Bay area’s technology specialties, soared from a few million dollars in 1940 to $ 113 million by 1959. This dramatic increase in military purchases helped double California’s share of prime military contracts from 13 to 26 percent from 1951 to 1953, which catapulted the state into the top spot in terms of total military contract spending, overtaking the previous leader, New York.

>  From 1941 to 1944, Hewlett Packard retooled its line

>  of electronic measuring devices and receivers to increase output by twenty-seven times, from $ 37,000 to $ 1 million, while increasing employment by only eleven times, from nine people to one hundred. 25 Varian Associates raised klystron sales by a factor of one hundred and twenty-five, between 1949 and 1959 while only quadrupling its staff size.

>  This kind of within-firm reallocation in the Bay area signaled a level of adaptability that was missing elsewhere. Boston’s Route 128, home to important firms such as Digital Equipment Corporation (see Chapter 4), did not manage to adjust in the same way. Incumbents were slower to shift product lines. For example, Raytheon, one of the east coast’s most military-dependent firms, still sold more than 55 percent of its output to the military by the late 1960s. Nor did a post-1960 startup wave sweep through Route 128 on the scale of the Bay area’s. Whereas more than forty new semiconductor firms were established in Northern California from 1959 to 1976, only five opened in Massachusetts.

>  Practical universities—along with rolling, sun-soaked hills in a temperate climate—appealed to individuals interested in technology, many of them uninterested in the brutally cold winters and more structured order associated with the east coast. In Congressional testimony on how to foster a “Climate for Entrepreneurship and Innovation in the United States,” Robert Noyce of Intel emphasized the geographic advantages of Silicon Valley. “What attracted us to this area?” he asked. “First of all it is one of the best climates in the world. We have good weather and an unspoiled—at least at the time—terrain nearby.”

>  Cultural openness can be a powerful driver of creativity and innovation. 39 In the Bay area, it helped to cultivate the technological progress that can come with immigration. Paradoxically, given the emphasis on links to military technology outlined above, immigrant inventors played a key role in the development of private sector industry precisely because of their limited access to defense-related employment. In his Congressional testimony, Noyce declared that, at Intel in 1985, 80 percent of its newly hired PhDs and 50 percent of its master’s degree–level hires were foreign born.

>  Varian Associates had no elaborate reporting charts, and each engineer was a part owner. Employees voted for a group of colleagues who sat on a “Management Advisory Board,” which helped senior engineers design firm policy. Similarly, Hewlett-Packard maintained a nontraditional, decentralized organizational structure based on the belief that it encouraged teamwork, openness, and creativity. Senior executives, including the two founders, frequently engaged in project work with new engineers. Managers were taught to “wander around” and be accessible. They nurtured informal, unplanned conversations with employees, who were also encouraged to pursue their own ideas.

>  Bay area tech firms were among the first to offer nonmonetary fringe benefits—and the most ambitious in designing them. In 1939, Eimac set up an on-site medical unit and a subsidized cafeteria for its workers. Litton Industries (incorporated in 1947) went a step further in 1949 by purchasing a large tract of land surrounding Jackson Lake in the High Sierras for employees to use as a vacation spot. Profit-sharing and employee stock ownership plans became common, in part as a way of retaining talent.

>  Going back to a landmark decision in 1872 as part of California’s Civil Code, the state provided more rights to labor, and denied corporations the right to enforce any restrictive labor contracts they might devise—such as non-compete agreements forbidding employees to enter into competition with the firm for some period after their employment by it. While this legislation arose accidentally as a consequence of California’s mix of Spanish, Mexican, and English legal traditions, it had long-lasting legacy effects.

>  It is important to remember, however, that although the Fairchild investment has a legendary status in accounts of the rise of Silicon Valley, this was not a VC-style arrangement. The nature of the original contract to buy between Fairchild Camera and the founders meant that the financial upside was capped at between $ 3 million and $ 5 million, regardless of the degree of success. There would be no outsized payoff for the founders. When Fairchild Camera acquired Fairchild Semiconductor under the terms of the original agreement, the eight scientists received publicly traded shares in the parent company and became employees. 56 Furthermore, although Rock kept in contact with the eight founders, he was not involved in any governing capacity at Fairchild Semiconductor.

>  “I really liked the eight of them,” he would later state, “and thought they would accomplish something.” 57 In what would become a hallmark of his investment style, Rock emphasized that “good ideas and good products are a dime a dozen … good people are rare,” and explained: “I generally pay more attention to the people who prepare a business plan than to the proposal itself.”

>  Davis starts the speech by outlining what actually constitutes a “winner.” In a financial sense, it meant “a situation in which our initial investment would appreciate at least ten times in five to seven years”—a criterion that some might incorrectly call “too stringent.” He argued there was often a failure to realize that “the risks in small companies are so enormous” and that “some would fail for practically unforeseeable causes” while “others would only putter along.” Davis commented that the overall portfolio return would depend on “the few that did exceed the ten times criterion” and that the “up-side potential is to us much more important than the downside risk.” He also acknowledged that Davis &amp; Rock’s investment strategy went beyond startups to include firms “in business long enough to have a market of some kind.” For these types of investments, he argued, a multiple of “four or five times” seemed reasonable given the lower level of risk.

>  On the question of how to select portfolio company investments, Davis was unequivocal: “back the right people.” Fundamentally, he said, “people make products; products don’t make people” and furthermore, “only a tiny percentage of people possess the managerial and motivational capabilities to build extraordinary growth companies.”

>  He went on to list six criteria for identifying the “right people”:

>  Integrity. This is basic, but too often overlooked or assumed. It implies more than financial honesty. It includes the guts to take responsibility, admit mistakes, face the facts.

>  Motivation. This is the key criterion. Do the people want to build the largest and best company that can possibly be built without reckless haste and foolish risk?

>  Market Orientation. The man I like to back is completely market orientated. He has interest only in things that people are going to buy, buy soon, and buy in quantity. He starts there—not with an idea of a product he likes because it would be a fine creation, a magnificent solution to a problem only a few people want to have solved …

>  And, the operation he plans should be of the type he has managed. It is costly for investors to have a manager learn at their expense.

>  In terms of sectors where such entrepreneurial individuals might be active, Davis said he preferred manufacturing to services, because “the more you sell, the more profitably you can produce.” He targeted innovative “sophisticated products” aimed at “existing markets” on the order of “around $ 100 million and which are still growing rapidly.” Although backing the “right people” therefore meant simultaneously backing the right technologies and markets, Davis was unambiguous about his people-first approach.

>  In the same way that the eight defectors from Shockley had faced difficulties contracting for finance, Palevsky ultimately ceded 80 percent of his firm for $ 980,000 in capital. 67 With venture capital investment also came governance. Rock sat on the board at Davis’s insistence, subsequently becoming chairman. In 1965, Scientific Data Systems had sales of about $ 45 million and $ 3 million in net profits. Three years later, it had sales of $ 100 million and was double the size of Digital Equipment Corporation. Xerox, taken at the time by the rash notion that it must diversify into computers (because its major competitor IBM was diversifying into copiers) saw it as an acquisition possibility. Xerox went ahead with the acquisition in exchange for a stratospheric $ 990,000,000 of its stock.

>  time. In fact, Rock had actually encouraged Noyce to leave Fairchild Semiconductor. Rock later remembered: “In 1968, Noyce called me and said, ‘Gee, I think maybe Gordon and I do want to leave Fairchild Semiconductor and go into business for ourselves.’ And so we talked about it for a while and I asked him how much money they needed and he said $ 2.5 million. And I said, ‘Well how much money are you guys willing to put up?’ He thought about it for a while and said, ‘Well, we’ll each put up $ 250,000’ which represented a fairly good portion of their net worth at the time.”

>  His interest was later piqued, however, at the Homebrew Computer Show in San Jose, where Jobs and Wozniak were in attendance. 88 He described the scene: “There was a big auditorium full of people with circuit boards and makeshift computers. No one was actually making a computer. Many booths were empty. I walked over to the Apple booth, and I couldn’t get close to it. People were piled up behind the booth. I began to figure maybe there was something to this. I stood around there for quite a while, and listened to people talking about it, and I thought, there’s really something here and if Mike is going to be really serious about this company, I guess I’ll make an investment.”

>  Once, when Perkins was asked what made for a successful venture capital investment, he summed it up: “if you have good people, proprietary technology, and a high growth market sector, you’ll win every time.”

>  The prospectus goes on to outline the preconditions for success in venture capital investing, noting in particular that “the experience, judgment, and management capability of the operating general partners is key.” To succeed, the partnership planned to invest according to three main principles: Exposure to a wide variety of investment opportunities. Excellent judgment in selecting only the best situations. The ability to develop the investment.

>  To Kleiner and Perkins, “exposure” meant access to networks and deal flow, which they were in a privileged position to exploit as individuals who were “widely known within their industries.” For this reason, the prospectus emphasizes their involvement with Stanford University “and the associated circle of contacts.” It stresses that “their own names should be a magnet to future potential opportunities” and explains that “it is for this reason that they are identifying the Fund with their own names, rather than some less recognizable title.” The assumption was that the Kleiner &amp; Perkins name alone would be an important source of credentialing for portfolio companies.

>  Kleiner &amp; Perkins quickly earned a reputation in the Silicon Valley startup community as a highly knowledgeable technology investor, though Perkins’s dominant personality was often a source of friction. Although investment opportunities were difficult to identify, the first fund made seventeen investments between 1973 and 1980. Most of these were unsuccessful or generated mediocre returns. Breakeven and loss-making investments made up 41 percent of the portfolio; they included such epic failures as Advanced Recreational Equipment Corporation, which produced a kit to transform motorcycles into snowmobiles, and American Athletic Shoe Corporation, which attempted to market the “retreading” of rubber-soled tennis and other athletic shoes. Nevertheless, these failed investments had the positive effect of considerably sharpening Kleiner &amp; Perkins’s investment focus. Perkins would come to acknowledge that “we bring little to the party outside the high technology area.” 112

>  Crucially for Kleiner &amp; Perkins, 24 percent of the portfolio investments generated multiples of greater than ten on their total investment. And while these investments accounted for 30 percent of the total cost of the portfolio, they generated a staggering 93 percent of the gross return. Figure 6.2 shows the outsized influence of two key investments: Tandem Computers and Genentech.

>  Perkins was extensively involved, writing the prospectus and shepherding the company through its roadshow. At the IPO, Kleiner &amp; Perkins’s investment was worth $ 12.5 million, which would become $ 152.2 million assuming the investment was held until June 30, 1984.117 Tandem became one of the most successful computer firms in the United States. In 1983, it held a 98 percent market share in the “fail-safe” computer sector. Perkins continued on as chairman of the board until it was acquired by Compaq in 1997, although not without considerable cost to his personal relationship with Treybig. Perkins commented that “it became my duty to replace him in order for the company to merge into Compaq.” 118 By happenstance, given that half its founding employees had worked at HP and Perkins had a strong relationship with that firm, Tandem became a de facto part of HP in 2002 when HP, in turn, acquired Compaq.

>  Second, Kleiner &amp; Perkins’s association with Genentech epitomized what good governance meant from the standpoint of a professional venture capital firm. Perkins had advocated the

>  lean startup approach, insisting on outsourcing, experimentation, and staged financing as a way of de-risking the business. He showed that a lean business model could work even in a highly capital-intensive industry. Furthermore, good governance meant being able to exert some degree of control over the founders, even though Kleiner &amp; Perkins did not have a controlling equity stake. As a condition of Kleiner &amp; Perkins’s original investment, Perkins joined the board, performing a post-investment monitoring role and setting milestones. Year after year, he spent an afternoon a week at Genentech. Good governance meant faultless execution. On reflection, Perkins said: “I honestly think that if we had to do it all over again, we’d do it the same way … subcontracting the experiments, then licensing to Lilly … I don’t think we could have done it better.” 135

>  Third, achieving success in a VC-backed startup was conditional upon being able to leverage existing capabilities in the local area. Note that the scientific basis for recombinant DNA technology was largely developed by star academics at universities in California, operating with the aid of government funding, and Genentech’s own staff included many scientists trained at these institutions. While the collaborative nature of the relationships blurred the boundaries of attribution (and Genentech engaged in litigation with UCSF over precisely this issue), these institutions were undoubtedly essential to Genentech’s and Kleiner &amp; Perkins’s success. Reinforcing points made earlier in this chapter, these contextual factors were the important preconditions that allowed Silicon Valley VC to develop.

>  Furthermore, in light of his investing experiences, Perkins established his own “law.” It states that “market risk is inversely proportional to technical risk.” The best startups, he argued, would push the frontier of technology, thereby guaranteeing market power and selling opportunities for their products. If a product were easy to develop, competition would quickly erode any excess returns. Perkins sometimes got investment decisions wrong on this basis, but he at least had a consistent viewpoint and perspective. He rejected the hypothesis that VC investing was simply about embracing randomness.

>  As a venture capital investor, Valentine focused mostly on markets where he saw great potential. In his words, “my position has always been you find a great market and you build multiple companies in that market.” 139 Of course, neither Rock nor Perkins ignored markets when making choices about the portfolio companies they backed, but this was not their primary filter. And likewise, Valentine explained that his investment decisions involved an assessment of “people risks, market risks, product development risks, and finance risk”—and that three out of these four needed to be understood comprehensively for an investment decision to be made. Yet, he went on to emphasize: “the risk that I’m least willing to take is market risk.” 140

>  Like Perkins, he had a volatile temper, though probably more outsized. Often abrasive to the point of being downright obnoxious, he is once said to have reprimanded a subordinate so severely that the person in question fainted.

>  Valentine’s next stop was National Semiconductor, where he joined a team of managers, many from Fairchild, attempting a turnaround. Valentine was brought in by Charlie Sporck, to whom he had reported when Sporck served as Fairchild’s general manager. The company, a publicly traded Santa Clara–based firm, was struggling: it made approximately $ 7.2 million in sales in 1966, but virtually no profit. National Semiconductor was targeting industry customers with its products, which was a very different proposition from targeting large military customers. Rather than relying largely on an internal sales force, as most firms in its industry did at the time, Valentine spearheaded a distributed sales strategy involving the use of a large network of independent distributors who received commissions on sales of five to seven percent. To equip these distributors with the requisite practical knowledge of the products they were selling, he deployed highly trained “field applications engineers” to supply the technical know-how. Moreover, these engineers often consulted with companies directly during the sales process, which meant that end users started to design their architecture around National Semiconductor’s products.

>  That focus on market potential provided an opportunity to create comparative advantage in venture investing. He later summarized this perspective: The great thing about evaluating markets first is that usually there are very poor data sources. So you have to create these scraps of information, and most people don’t do that—they prefer to make a judgment on some other basis: whether the product is patentable, whether the technology is differentiated, whether the people are world-class. To us, you can scrape and push and dig and find out tidbits of information which, when you put them together, you get a conviction about when something will happen. You talk to people in distribution; you talk to all of the sources of information that you can, and you make a judgment. 145

>  As Valentine struggled to raise additional capital, in a time when venture capital was not recognized as an area of investment, he was coached in his efforts by Robert Kirby of Capital Guardian Trust, a subsidiary of the Capital Group. Valentine was introduced to potentially receptive investors. The Ford Foundation agreed to invest $ 3 million—warning, however, that it would withdraw its capital if other institutional investors did not join. After some time, General Electric Pension invested $ 3 million. Alcoa, Armco, and Yale University followed. Valentine never forgot that “without Bob’s introductions and guidance on pitching institutional investors, there would be no Sequoia Capital.”

>  Across Valentine’s early investments at Sequoia, common patterns can be identified. Access to networks mattered, especially as Valentine relied on connections made at Fairchild Semiconductor. In 1974, for example, he learned from a Fairchild connection about Atari, a startup founded by Nolan Bushnell in 1972 that made its mark by developing the first arcade video games. Its early hit, Pong, developed by star engineer Allan Alcorn, a UC Berkeley graduate, was a simulated tennis game. The first versions were made from television sets purchased at a nearby Walgreens, with a milk carton inside to collect coins, and placed in a local bar. The game quickly caught on. To finance home entertainment versions of Pong, Valentine put up $ 600,000 and by mid-1975 he had raised a further $ 1.5 million from the Mayfield Fund, Time, Inc., and Fidelity Associates. In September 1976, Atari was sold to Warner Communications for $ 28 million. In the span of about a year, Valentine had gained a fourfold multiple on his investment.

>  Although Venrock, not Valentine, led the first-round financing for Apple (see Chapter 5), Valentine took a $ 200,000 stake and obtained a seat on the board. When offered $ 6 million for this stake in a private placement prior to Apple’s IPO in 1980, Valentine took the exit opportunity. With the benefit of hindsight, this stands as one of the biggest mistakes in venture capital history. Valentine still, however, gained a multiple of thirty on his investment within a year and a half. 156

>  As Valentine noted, “when the world badly wants what we have and is willing to pay us twenty or thirty times what we paid for it, our inclination is to let them take it.” 157

>  As an insight into his personality and approach, Valentine once quipped at a speech at Stanford University in October 2010 that “I had a special advantage going into the venture business … I knew the future. And if you don’t think knowing the future is a great advantage, it is a phenomenal advantage.” 158 In reality, however, it was difficult to pick the winners ex ante. Don Valentine, like Rock and Perkins, faced the challenge of trying to identify novel product categories and market developments and anticipate future trends in entrepreneurship.

>  Specifically, founders tend to view control of their firm as a first-order priority, whereas investors tend to think more about returns. Valentine emphasized that “our first responsibility is to our limited partners,” and for this reason he played a crucial role in persuading a reluctant Bushnell to sell Atari to Warner. He recognized that “it was his first company … and he did not want to give it up.” 161 In following his fiduciary obligations, however, he often created antagonism. Oracle cofounder Larry Ellison lamented what he described as the “Mephistophelian” terms under which VCs provided funding for new startups, and their common practice of replacing founders with professional management. Oracle was founded in 1977 and Sequoia invested in 1983. Although Ellison and Valentine enjoyed a mutually respectful relationship, Ellison gave speeches on the theme of “Just Say No to Venture Capital,” where he criticized the proliferation of baseless founder replacements in venture-backed investments.

>  Cisco first brought their routers to market in 1986 at price points ranging between $ 7,000 and $ 50,000. Within a year, revenues grew to over $ 250,000 a month—with only eight employees—but Bosack and Lerner were unable to fund further expansion. While they approached a multitude of VC firms without success, Valentine agreed to invest $ 2.5 million for a 32 percent stake. 163 Unbeknownst to anyone at the time, the internet was poised for a remarkable explosion in growth. In 1984, when Bosack and Lerner started Cisco, about a thousand hosts existed on the internet. By December 1987, the year they got funding, there were 28,174. By January 1998, there were 29.7 million.

>  financing terms without fully appreciating what the various positive and negative covenants meant. Valentine became chairman of the board and effectively took control of Cisco’s managerial development. Valentine believed “there is one set of management skills needed to start a company and another set needed to manage a bigger company. They are rarely resident in the same person.” 166 He hired John Morgridge, a Stanford MBA from Grid Systems Corporation, and replaced several executives who had been friends of Lerner and Bosack with more experienced managers.

>  Sales of the Apple II computer were boosted by its ability to run VisiCalc, an electronic spreadsheet that became known as the original “killer app.”

>  word processing on dedicated machines. Despite some early success, the company began to falter a few years later due to management problems. Adler took over operational control and “figured out who the egoists were and cut them to pieces.” During this process, Adler replaced MicroPro’s founder with an experienced professional manager. From losses of $ 1.5 million in Q1 of 1983, MicroPro went on to a successful IPO in 1984 at a valuation of $ 125 million, before ceding growth to new competition from WordPerfect and Microsoft Word. 10

>  When California-based Gavilan Computer—hoping to be an early pioneer in laptops—filed for bankruptcy in September 1984, leading to the loss of $ 31 million in venture capital money, the situation was lamentable. But tellingly, a New Enterprise Associates venture capitalist who had been one of the lead investors offered a more optimistic perspective. “The most you can lose in any company is 100 percent of your investment if it fails,” he noted, “but you can gain up to 1,000 or 2,000 percent if the company succeeds.”

>  In 1984, Reid Dennis, a well-respected venture capitalist at the Menlo Park firm Institutional Venture Partners, cautioned a National Venture Capital Association audience that the “public securities of venture-backed companies are the product of the venture investment process … the public is taking a shellacking and this will ultimately impact the venture capital industry.”

>  It got started in high-tech ventures as a “low-end disruptor,” by persuading leading firms like Lehman Brothers to allow it to do the underwriting in the smaller and much less lucrative high-tech segment. Typically, the brokerage fee for such transactions was 7 percent, so the size of the public share offering mattered. Because H&amp; Q was closely connected to leading Silicon Valley venture capitalists, it got privileged access to some of the most important IPO deals of the 1980s.

>  Following the death of George Quist in 1982, Wills became chairman of the firm, but he struggled to adapt to this new leadership role. H&amp; Q raised larger pools of venture capital in line with its growing reputation, but it did not have the capabilities to manage a portfolio of VC investments at this scale. During the mid-to late 1980s, H&amp; Q financed over a hundred early-stage companies but neglected to fully nurture and govern all of them. Performance returns suffered. Forbes described the portfolio as being “littered with walking corpses.” 32 For his part, Hambrecht was criticized for promoting unscrupulous underwritings because shares in companies H&amp; Q took public so frequently traded below their initial offering price in the following years. Hambrecht remained optimistic in the face of this criticism, however. He saw H&amp; Q’s waning reputation as only a temporary reaction to cyclicality in the stock market and the declining value of technology stocks after the peak in 1983.

>  Most of the time, the loan contract would come with warrants entitling the provider of the debt to acquire equity in the borrowing firm. Mezzanine finance tends to offer lower but more stable returns than dedicated early-stage venture funds do. For that reason, the number of mezzanine investors increased in the 1980s. Banks established dedicated funds that crossed over between VC and private equity operations. For example, in 1989, Citicorp raised a $ 650 million fund to invest solely in mezzanine securities, to be managed by its venture capital arm.

>  The most notable of the new niche players in this area was Silicon Valley Bank (SVB). It was incorporated in 1983 by William Biggerstaff, a Harvard MBA, who had held a senior position at Wells Fargo Bank. Roger Smith, who had spent a career in banking, became CEO. 36 SVB opened its first office in San Jose, California, and while it also engaged in real estate and corporate lending, it quickly became defined by its innovative lending practices to early-stage firms. It provided equipment financing, working capital, and asset acquisition loans, as well as bridge financing to high-tech startups with varying degrees of security.

>  The objective of NEA is to invest in and assist emerging innovative companies with exceptional management and outstanding growth and profit potential. In essence we finance change. The objective of NEA is to achieve a superior investment return over the life cycle of the Partnership for our Limited Partners. Capital appreciation will be an earned reward for providing risk capital and assisting in the creation of real economic value.… The goal of NEA is to retain the venture art form while directing substantial resources toward company creation.

>  “In 1980, we were approached by Merck to see if NEA would be interested in setting up a dedicated life sciences fund with Merck as the only LP. We took the proposal to the investment committee to discuss the subject. It was tempting to have access to Merck’s life sciences knowledge, but the IC had concerns. It became immediately clear that Merck as a corporation may want to do an investment for strategic scientific purposes rather than for pure economic gain. Who would have the first call on a healthcare investment: NEA or the dedicated life science fund? The potential number of conflicts of interest was so enormous that we declined the opportunity.”

>  Newhall noted that NEA advocated a wide distribution of carry to younger partners to facilitate an orderly transfer of leadership. A newly promoted general partner would have typically spent three to six years at NEA as a special partner (an interim step) and three years before that as an associate. The intention of the founding partners to create an enduring venture capital firm is reflected in changes in the distribution of carried interest. In NEA’s first fund, the founding partners received 100 percent of the total carried interest of the partnership. As new partners were brought in or promoted, this share fell. In NEA II, the founding partner share of total carried interest was 66 percent. In NEA III, it was 52 percent, and in NEA IV, 38 percent.

>  In 1981, the five founders of Giga-tronics sought $ 600,000 of investment capital, a purposefully small amount because they wanted to retain control. Several marquee venture capital firms countered with offers in the region of $ 1 million, conditional on a significant ownership share. All were rejected. Because Kramlich believed in the technology and the founding team, he took a more holistic approach and agreed to meet the founders’ terms. He accepted a smaller share of the firm and invested $ 480,000 for 29 percent. 84 Giga-tronics produced a multiple of thirty-two on NEA’s investment.

>  NEA’s founders each had their own distinctive view of what drove this success. Kramlich credited personal drive: “I have an unlimited amount of energy. I’m willing to take chances to reach certain goals, push the envelope. I know what I can do. I’m straightforward with people so they tend [to] believe me, which allows me to lead in what I believe is the proper direction.” 85 Bonsal spoke of self-assurance: “to be in the venture business, I guess you’ve got to feel confident in yourself. You have to have self-confidence to get up in the morning and go do it. If you don’t have that ability to go do it, it won’t happen.” 86 Newhall was characteristically philosophical: “You can know all the rules of venture investing and yet have nothing of value.… Rules must be part of a natural instinct. Not a checklist formula. What is really important varies in each situation. Skill is only maintained and improved by continuous immersion in the art and hard work. Success comes from knowing that which is important before, rather than after, the fact.” 87

>  Valentine noted that he looked for people with industry and startup expertise because “we pride ourselves on our differences and the methodology by which we develop our individual opinions.” He underscored the point: “I look for people that are different than I am, because we do things here on the basis of consent among the partners. I don’t like having a homogenized set of opinions. I want as much confrontation and different thinking as possible.” 94

>  A New Yorker journalist once described John Doerr as a “highly caffeinated Clark Kent.” 97 Chuck Newhall at NEA describes himself as hypomanic, claiming it is also a trait of most of the entrepreneurs he knows. 98 No single pattern of behavior or investment style stands out, only adding to the difficulty of replicating VC success, whether during the 1980s or now.

