---
title: eBoys - The First Inside Account of Venture Capitalists at Work
category: books
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Randall E. Stross
layout: bookpost
tags:
- benchmark
- venturecapital
- ebay
- founders
- billgurley
- investing
- startups
---

>  Benchmark partners had selected one another on the basis of perceived ability to subordinate individual ego to the larger interests of the collective. It was a self-acknowledged experiment, but they were hopeful that the merits of their alternative model—a partnership of equals—would, in the end, outshine Kleiner Perkins’s heliocentric system that revolved around Doerr.

>  Obtaining the opportunity to invest in a cash-burning company that had only just launched its service and had yet to sign a single significant customer was not an instant win for Benchmark. (One partner summed up the situation: “The good news is, we won. The bad news is, we won.”)

>  He had his coterie of mates, to whom he was fiercely loyal. But outside that circle, he was not a gregarious person. In fact, he was unable to mix without putting many on the defensive. He walked with a chip on his shoulder that he took no pains to disguise. He had a particular aversion to anyone whose status derived from inherited privilege. A college friend would later liken his attitude to that of a ghetto-hardened tough: If it was given to ya, don’t think you’re better than me.

>  Beirne got a call from his wife, who informed him, “Market’s down five hundred points and still going. You couldn’t have picked a worse time to do this.” It was October 19, 1987. Perhaps he should have gone to biz school after all, she couldn’t suppress saying. We’ll be fine, he reassured her. Then he took immediate action. He purchased a couple of six-packs of Budweiser and sat on the floor with Ramsey, making outlandish predictions about the certain future success of Ramsey Beirne.

>  Dave Beirne’s pitch to the first prospective client was to ask for one shot, an opportunity to show what his brand of service was like, and once he had the chance, he went maniacal on it, out-testosteroned everybody, he’d say.

>  In year two, Beirne convinced Ramsey and their first associate, Alan Seiler, to abandon the low-rent contingency-fee model and instead adopt a high-rent retainer-fee model, the one that only the elite search firms used. Clients would now be asked to pay up front, in order to obtain Ramsey Beirne’s attention—and the fee would be collected whether Ramsey Beirne delivered candidates that the client decided to hire or not. To be a success, one must act the part, and a retainer fee was the way to communicate that one’s services were in demand. That was the theory. It was not easy, however, to remain confident when Ramsey Beirne’s revenue immediately dropped to zero—and remained there. Beirne was barely able to keep his colleagues from abandoning the experiment as the months went by and their personal savings evaporated. Finally, six months later, they got their first retainer, from Xywrite, a small software publisher, which paid Ramsey Beirne $ 42,000 to undertake a search.

>  If, when dialing for dollars, Seiler lucked upon a company in Boston that was about to launch a search and would be willing to hear a pitch from Ramsey Beirne at a breakfast meeting the next morning at 8: 30, then Beirne would call back and ask that it be moved to 7: 30, just to show that his blood was Type A—and he and Chuck Ramsey would set off for Boston by car at 2: 30 A.M.

>  Once liberated from the telephone and actually in the door, Dave Beirne could really go to work, selling by not selling. No backslapping bonhomie, no inane chitchat, no annoying repetition of your first name, no clumsy paraphrasing of what you’d just told him. “I have nothing to sell you today—let’s take that off the table and just talk,” he would say. “My goal is to earn the right to have a relationship with you, and I know it’s my responsibility to earn the right.” He’d vacuum up information about the candidate’s command of the business, but also about intellect, ethics, leadership, energy. Beirne likened it to digging into someone’s soul, then showing the person a portrait. He had removed anything uncouth in his appearance that would provide an excuse for him to be turned away. There wasn’t a hint of New Yawk in his voice, and you would never see him when his hair wasn’t freshly cut, gelled, combed, and parted, when his white dress shirts did not consist more of starch than cotton. Once he got in, he could get individuals who were ten, twenty, thirty years his senior to open up. His voice was measured and controlled; his sentences were well composed—they never began, then aborted and restarted; his manner was free of tics that would betray impatience. Most important, he didn’t display the know-it-all arrogance seen in many who have coasted through the most selective colleges, nor was he handicapped by a parvenu’s tendency to try to bluster his way to status parity by talking incessantly. He instead used his smarts in the employ of listening. His prospective clients and candidates discovered he was a paragon of the quick study, who when asked to restate what he’d been told got it right, absolutely right, and followed with questions that showed strategic instincts about how to make the business or career grow. Respect, trust, and confiding followed.

>  But Beirne called the company’s CEO and was put into voice mail. Office lore had Beirne saying, “Joe. David Beirne. Here’s the deal. I want my fuckin’ money Federal Expressed over-fuckin’-night, right now. This is the most unprofessional bullshit thing I’ve ever heard, goddamn it. You’re better than that, and you know you’re better than that. So stop playing this fuckin’ game and just get it done.” Later, when the story was recounted, Beirne said he never would have used profanity when speaking with a client. But to his colleagues who told it, the story’s principal point was not the language, but rather how the rest of the story permitted a new Dave Beirne, a kinder, gentler one, to appear. After he hung up, the story went, he looked over at his colleagues, whose mouths were agape, and said, “That was the right thing to do, right, guys? I mean, this guy owes us money.” The others reassured him but steeled themselves for the repercussions when Beirne’s message was picked up. The CEO called back. “David, I wanted to turn that into a tape. That’s an unbelievable message.” He said he had transferred Beirne’s message to his own collections department, saying, “This guy is how we should be collecting our friggin’ money.” And to Beirne he added, “By the way, your check’s on the way.” It arrived as promised, via FedEx.

>  This reputation did not square with the anecdotal testimony of actual entrepreneurs who had venture backing. The entrepreneurs’ biggest complaint with venture capitalists was not that they were too meddlesome but that they were not meddlesome enough—once they had invested, they didn’t return phone calls. From this perspective, venture capitalists were more like bankers than they realized.

>  But when he told a career manager at a GM plant he was visiting about his frustration that the company would not return him to a factory, he received surprising advice to consider the opportunities offered by other firms: It’s a big world out there—go for it! (Three weeks later this same manager left GM himself.) Feeling as if he had been granted emancipation papers, Kagle joined Boston Consulting Group in 1980 and three years later was recruited by Dave Marquardt to join Technology Venture Investors. He was able to repay his alma mater with a grant of Microsoft stock—Marquardt, thanks to the Stanford business-school connection to Steve Ballmer, had been the sole venture capitalist permitted to invest in Microsoft.

>  In the venture world, real men did tech deals and only tech deals; at TVI, Kagle had to keep his consumer inclinations hidden. He’d brought in Starbucks as a prospective early-stage investment, but his partners could not get comfortable with “a coffee deal.” They did indulge him by approving an investment in a Dutch food company that tried unsuccessfully to introduce to American palates a pudding similar to yogurt called Tootje.

>  The closest he got was the day he came out of a breakfast meeting in the Town &amp; Country shopping center across from Stanford and saw an improbably long line snaking out of the tiny, adjacent restaurant, a newly opened place called Juice Club. He canceled his appointments for the morning, interviewed customers and employees on the spot, tracked down the owner, who lived in San Luis Obispo in central California, and lobbied for a hearing. He flew down and persuaded the twenty-seven-year-old to abandon a franchise strategy and instead use venture capital to expand his business. They would soon relaunch the business as Jamba Juice. But is a countertop filled with blenders a high-tech deal?

>  In a way, venture capitalists and book publishers are similar, in that their job description requires an ability to say no often. Actually, publishers have off-loaded to literary agents the task of sifting through manuscripts from unknowns. But there is no professional equivalent to agents in the world of venture capital funding. So venture capitalists deputize other entrepreneurs, executives, attorneys, and friends whose judgment they trust to do the preliminary screening.

>  Venture capitalists are not in the idea-generating end of business—that is a gift they neither have nor need. The venture guy’s job is to refine his powers of evaluation, to hone the ability to see the outline of one good idea among the thousand brought in by entrepreneurs that are too small or me-too.

>  Two years later, they added new books and subsequently developed a well-stocked-and-damn-the-accountants identity. In fact, Louis Borders had applied a talent for developing computer systems; he created artificial-intelligence software designed expressly for managing the inventory of a very large bookstore.

>  Initially, Borders used the systems as the basis for a separate business, serving other bookstores, but eventually—fifteen years after opening the first store—a second store was added. With the software, Borders Books pioneered in opening bookstores with a much larger stock—150,000 to 200,000 titles—than the typical 40,000 titles carried by the chain bookstores in malls. In 1992, on the eve of an IPO that would have valued the company, then consisting of twenty-one stores, at $ 180 million, the Borders brothers sold the company to Kmart for an undisclosed sum that presumably matched the IPO price and added a premium for the cession of independence.

>  Three million separate stock-keeping units, or SKUs. When he had been in the book business, he had added far too many book titles, at least according to conventional wisdom, and it had worked out well; why not proceed on the same assumption here? The plans also included neighborhood stores, complete with kiosks providing a PC and connection to the Web, for those who wished to place their orders from the store instead of from home.

>  Entrepreneurs who sought venture funding usually did not need to invest any more personal money into the venture than they had already spent to bring it to life. But some venture capitalists did demand more. Arthur Rock, the senior dean of American venture capitalists and an early investor in Intel, always insisted whenever his venture firm put money into a start-up that the entrepreneur co-invest one third of his total net worth, whether it be large or small.

>  The presentation went well. Don Valentine, Sequoia’s crusty founder, who was known to ask a visiting supplicant, “Who cares?” (or, in a more vulgar rendering when impressions of Valentine were performed, “Why the fuck should we give you our money?”), seemed pleased. He had no compunction about asking the question that everyone else in the room had to have been wondering about but hadn’t asked: Louis, your family alone could fund this. Why the hell are you talking to us?

>  Among the group were those who clung stubbornly to throwback instruments born long before Silicon Valley came into being. Though trained as an electrical and mechanical engineer, though he was an investor in the most advanced electronic design automation software, Bob Kagle used a low-tech device: a dime-store datebook so small that when he held it in both hands, flipping its tiny pages to locate a given day’s schedule, it almost looked like a dollhouse miniature. The most conspicuous anachronism in the room, however, would have fit well in a nineteenth-century counting room (yet had an instant-on feature faster than even the Pilot’s): a leather-bound journal that Dave Beirne brought to the meeting to jot down the occasional note about a call to be made. He had used the same kind of journal while at Ramsey Beirne—a new one put into service with the arrival of each new year—and as he was a newly arrived Silicon Valley resident, it was too early to know whether over time he would hold to the journal or put it aside for a recording medium of more recent provenance.

>  Stepping courageously—or blithely—across the carcasses of other companies that had tried to deliver groceries to the home, Webvan aspired to the revenues of Wal-Mart. Louis Borders was going to pull this off, Beirne believed. The partners needed only to see the new facility taking shape, and they would feel it, too. And they would stop looking at him as a gullible neophyte. “Louis,” Kevin Harvey had said to Borders the year before as they shook hands after agreeing to the investment, offering the most grand of predictions, “this is going to be a billion-dollar company.” “Naw. It’s going to be ten billion. Or zero.” That had made an impression on the Benchmark partners in the way a scary prediction that feels right does.

>  On the golf course the other day, he said, a friend had floated a theory that leaders, in business or anything else, are driven by demons. The best guys have them—implacable, subterranean demons that are the source of greatness. Harvey, the house critic when at the office, usually could be counted on to take issue with whatever stood as the conventional wisdom du jour, but on this point he peacefully agreed. What about their own demons, Harvey asked. “Oh, yes,” Beirne granted. But it was midmorning on a workday, not the time for a personal inventory.

>  This took Best by surprise; it had not thought to set policies that defined a maximum number of CPU cycles or Web-page hits for an account such as his. Best demanded that Omidyar move his site to a business server, and the monthly charge for his account jumped from $ 30 a month to $ 250. This turn of events forced him to change from a free service to almost free; in February 1996, to try to recoup the charges that Best imposed on him, Omidyar asked sellers to pay a small fee for items sold. There was no charge for listing items, and payment of the fee for items sold relied wholly upon the honesty of the seller to send in the money after the conclusion of a successful auction. The checks arrived in volume, delivered in the large canvas bags of the U.S. Postal Service. In month one he covered the $ 250 bill for his Internet service. In month two, $ 1,000 arrived; month three, $ 2,000; month four, $ 5,000; month five, $ 10,000.

>  The partners had to figure out some basic strategic questions: Should eBay try to build a business based on the Auction Web site? Or should it instead try to sell auction-management software to other websites? This was what some prospective angel investors advised them, and with no consumer marketing experience between the two of them, the latter seemed like a more prudent course. But while they deliberated, the number of listings grew organically 40 percent each month, without a penny spent in marketing.

>  She was still not interested, but she realized that now that they had stepped up the pressure, she had to pretend to go along—she needed to humor Dave Beirne and his former associates at Ramsey Beirne, preserve the relationships for that time in the future when she might really need them. For now, she would do as they asked and get on a plane. By being a good trouper, she would show them that she would seriously consider opportunities they brought to her in the future. All it would cost her would be the one day.

>  Whitman’s husband had arrived more skeptical than Kagle had anticipated he was going to be, but by the end of his visit, he appeared to have warmed up a bit and was talking about the possibility of getting an appointment at Stanford’s medical school. Kagle continued his report: “We’re going to be on Meg heavy this week. Her boys were great. We left them a care package at the hotel with Stanford caps and everything. I had them with the right Realtor looking at the right kind of places.” Afterward, Whitman had lightheartedly reported that one of her boys thought that thirteen-year-old Kelsey Kagle was rather cute. Summing up, Bob Kagle told his colleagues, “I’m feeling pretty good.”

>  He remembered something else, a small matter, but the personal touch—surprising Whitman with their attention to something so picayune—could be helpful. He turned to Dave Beirne: “There’s something you could help me on. This would be a great, high-class move for us to do. She’s got four hundred dollars tied up in a bankruptcy with Nets Inc. that she spent on expenses to fly down there to interview at Ramsey Beirne’s encouragement. If we got that to her in the next couple days, that would be such an impressive

>  He told Bob Kagle, “I think all these guys—we’re in a social environment where it is so macho to be an entrepreneur, and none of them are product pickers. It’s like, ‘I’ll be an entrepreneur—I don’t know what we’ll make, I don’t even care, but I’ll be an entrepreneur.’ It’s so rah-rah to go out and tell people, ‘I’m starting a company.’ ”

>  Steve Jurvetson, a young venture capitalist with Draper Fisher Jurvetson in Redwood City, was more aware than most venture guys of the existence of those who did not bounce back; his wife happened to be a psychiatrist, among whose clients were the would-be entrepreneurs who had failed (which in the Valley was pardonable) but who had not maintained their stride (which was not).

>  Therapy has not always been available. Unable to resist investing in the high-tech sector of his day in the late nineteenth century, Mark Twain was financially ruined by his irrationally hopeful investments in the infamous Paige typesetter; heavily in debt, he had to flee to Europe, where it took ten years before he could return with his family, recovered and solvent.

>  “God is not on the side of the big arsenals, but on the side of those who shoot best.” Voltaire’s words had been used by the Benchmark partners to solicit capital for their first fund. Would institutional investors welcome another first-time fund such as theirs? Their prospectus optimistically quoted Daniel Webster: “There is always room at the top.”

>  When he launched the company, John Doerr publicly derided Kaplan as being far out of his element, noting that he “doesn’t have any merchandising or mass-marketing success.” Amazingly, Kleiner Perkins later decided to let bygones be bygones and signed up to back Kaplan once again. Kaplan likened his ongoing ability to raise capital to the workings of Hollywood: “Just because you make Waterworld”—referring to the soggy 1995 flop whose reported budget of $ 175 million was the most expensive to date—“ doesn’t mean you’re not ever going to make Titanic.”

>  EBay had an enormous advantage over the competition that it only then, under challenge, was coming to appreciate: a nicely balanced critical mass of sellers and buyers in each of hundreds of categories. This delicate balance had been achieved through the natural evolution of the eBay ecosystem, without the intervention of any guiding hand. If in any given category there were too many sellers compared with buyers, the sellers would have been discouraged and quick to jump to eBay’s rivals to try their luck there. If there were too many buyers, and in order to win an auction one had to offer up a ludicrously high price, this too would have led to mass defections. Fortunately for eBay, the number of sellers and buyers, while growing exponentially, had remained well apportioned.

>  Dunlevie returned to consideration of the first deal and mocked his own aversion to spending time shopping. He said, “I am such an I-don’t-really-care-if-it-fits-or-looks-good-just-give-it-to-me-so-I-can-get-out-of-here shopper.” He sheepishly confessed that if he tried to buy eyeglasses online, he’d buy three pairs in three different sizes, hope one fit, and throw the others away. He and his partners all laughed at the absurdity of this.

>  “I think ten [face-to-face] interviews would tell you a lot more than calling fifty people,” Kagle said. Dunlevie cut in. Go to four guys at local clinics, show them a Pilot, and ask them to imagine using it to scribble prescriptions and then sending them to the pharmacy by putting it in a cradle and pressing a single button. “If two of the four say, ‘Yeah, that’s cool,’ that’s pretty informational. If all four say, ‘No fuckin’ way’ . . .” He didn’t have to finish the thought. “They’re going to say the same thing we said around this table,” Beirne predicted, “which is, ‘Yeah, sounds good. Yes. It makes sense.’ ” “I’d like to hear that,” Rachleff said.

>  Dunlevie and his colleagues embarrassed Omidyar with we-are-not-worthy bows. Omidyar and Skoll were effusive in thanking the Benchmark guys for their contributions. Whitman entertained everyone with stories of the road show, of New York, of handling the calls of congratulation—and of not wanting her sons to know about the money. Anyway, “It’s all paper.” Whitman’s former boss at Hasbro had just called her. When she’d resigned fewer than nine months before, he’d told her that he couldn’t fathom why in the world she would leave Hasbro for an unknown, on the other side of the country. Today he had called her and said, “Now I get it.”

>  The company now was out of cash and Atalla had to put in a million dollars immediately so it could make the payroll. But at the same time, there were a few corporate customers that seemed tantalizingly close to buying. Beirne listed for his partners three customer prospects who all showed signs of being excited. “There’s a technology here. The question is, do you feed this thing a little bit, or just kill it?” The other partners remained silent. Beirne went on, in a voice that was barely audible. “I’d love to kill it and I’d hate to kill it.” “You know that emotion is exactly the emotion you feel when it’s time to shut it down,” said Andy Rachleff. He and Beirne’s other partners all had faced similar junctures before; this was Beirne’s first.

>  “There sure are a lot of signs,” Rachleff repeated. He wasn’t concerned about Benchmark’s overall reputation being badly damaged. “The amazing thing about our business is, everyone forgets the losers—they remember the winners.” “I’m not worried about the personal.” “I understand. The collective. But given the number of winners that you’re associated with, and the firm’s associated with, it won’t be an issue.” “Part of hitting home runs, you strike out. Babe Ruth struck out,” offered another partner.

>  “You’ll never take it lightly,” Dunlevie added. “All those people—that’s the thing,” Beirne said, thinking of the ninety employees on the TriStrata payroll. Rachleff pointed out that in a portfolio, the emotions that Beirne would experience would always be biased toward the end of the spectrum representing pain. “The amazing thing is it hurts more on the downside than the good feelings on the upside.” “That’s my experience—three orders of magnitude,” Dunlevie quickly agreed. “Yeah,” Rachleff said, and then redid the ratio of intensity of pleasure versus pain. “One-X versus fifty-X.”

>  “So it’s your consensus, it’s very clear, this is a bad strategy?” Borders asked. “Well,” Dunlevie answered, “part of what you’re hearing from us is generic. It’s a knee-jerk reaction to the fact that we’ve been on the boards of hundreds of small companies, and the ones that focus, statistically, win at a much higher rate than the ones that try to do two or three things at once. So, no matter what the second idea was, you’d have that bias coming in. But I think you’re also hearing that we are so excited about the Webvan idea. It’s highly differentiated; the value of a customer is going to be super higher, and it becomes an execution issue, ’cause nobody can compete with you, as Andy says—whereas the other kind of feels to me like something I already got, frankly. I don’t mind getting two or three packages right now. When it gets to be forty, I’ll worry about that. But most of the dollar volume I spend is on stuff I want to get from Webvan.”

>  Beirne couldn’t wait. “Louis, I need to have a conversation. Just Louis and Dave. Because I can’t sleep. I love ya, I’ve enjoyed working with you as much as I’ve ever enjoyed working with anybody. We’re now building one of the most important companies I think there is. I think relationships are all about communication. I want to apologize ’cause I think I’ve pushed you too far. And if I have, I’d like to get together and just make sure we’re all on the same page, because I’m going to continue to throw myself on the tracks over this one. But I’ve promised you from the first day I met you that if we as a board agree to something, you get my one hundred and ten percent support.” Borders said he didn’t know what Beirne was talking about—Beirne had worked himself into a state for no reason. “Hey, Dave, I don’t think this relationship is even close to damaged. I think it just gets better. In my past company, I didn’t have any board members. I had no one like you. You’ve kicked my ass from the first day I met you. And I love it. I want you to do more of it, because it makes me smarter, it makes us hone our plan even better. This company is a much better place because of the drive you’ve put into me. Please continue.”

>  “You think he’d be a good investor?” asked Bruce Dunlevie. “I do, but the reason I do is because he’s a rare combination of highly intellectually curious and humble. I think he really is open to questioning his own thought process and what’s really working, what’s not working.” “It’s like being around an academic,” said Dunlevie. “He’s got so many ideas spouting forth, I really enjoy talking to him. My fear is that he’ll outthink it.” “Yeah, that’s a possibility.” “This is more a balls than brains business, as we’ve said many times. I think having too many brains can hurt you at some level.”

>  Bruce Dunlevie brought up the subject of associates when Andy Rachleff complained that too much of his time had recently been scheduled in meetings that partners had asked him to sit in on with entrepreneurs, where his point of view really was not needed. How about an associate?, Dunlevie suggested. “Somebody who is smart. Somebody who you bring to a meeting and they add value to it. I think there are associate candidates who exist in the world that we could recruit to do that. So, A, are you proud to have them in the firm, and B, do you get leverage out of them?”

>  Moog set up a temporary office at Benchmark. Stopping by a Monday partners’ meeting for a moment, he offered an entertaining story of Dave Beirne’s sweet words of encouragement, when the two had met recently for the first time and were shaking hands: “Don’t fuck it up.”

>  “Look,” Dunlevie said, “the goal of the dot.com business is to cannibalize the stores.” Nakasone was silent for a long time before speaking. “That’s not the goal at all. The goal is to complement.” “Okay, I’ll correct my language. The end result is going to be cannibalization of stores. And you’re going to go from eight hundred stores to two hundred in the next three or four or five years as a result of the Web.” Nakasone did not agree, leading Dunlevie to conclude that he wanted everything—the existing network of stores and a thriving online business—which was a natural-enough inclination but a delusional expectation if he really understood what the dot.comming of America entailed. This was hard sledding.

>  After two months of static listings, Amazon had made available to sellers a “bulk loader” that expedited uploading of many items at once. EBay had lagged in developing a bulk loader with the same ease of use. In the meantime, Amazon’s listings had shot from 60,000 to more than 120,000. But Westly was not overly concerned about this blip. After getting a report about the imminent introduction of eBay’s own new, improved bulk loader, he told the group, “We’re going to leave the others in the dust.” He smiled. “But of course in a nice eBaysian way.”

>  What’s most interesting about that moment were the metaphors that were used in the resulting article to talk about the Webvan experiment. One unidentified venture capitalist described Webvan as a “moonshot,” a daring, high-risk venture, and the reporter wondered alternatively whether the company would end up becoming “the Internet era’s equivalent of Waterworld, a disaster so epic it becomes an American legend.”

>  Revenues for 1999 would be $ 11.9 million, with net losses of $ 73.8 million; revenues would climb to $ 518 million by 2001, but losses would be $ 302 million. However, with $ 300 million in cash in hand, no debt, and the expectation of raising another $ 350 million from the IPO, it appeared that Webvan was financially well positioned to build out its centers nationally.

>  Louis Borders showed a slide titled “Enormous Addressable Market,” which offered a listing of the annual revenues for three businesses—groceries ($ 449 billion); drugstores ($ 106 billion); home meals ($ 100 billion). And then Shaheen described how Webvan didn’t merely reach the customer’s door, but literally crossed the threshold and stepped inside the home (when the Webvan delivery person unloaded the totes), creating an intimately personal relationship with the customer that no other Net business had any chance of reproducing.

>  At first glance it appeared that Red Hat was competing against Microsoft with the same hopeless odds of success that Netscape had. But Kevin Harvey took the view that Red Hat could avoid a frontal challenge to Microsoft’s business model; he worked to reposition the company away from the business of selling packaged software in boxes (Harvey’s old business) and move it toward providing support services and a central website for the Linux community. The only way Microsoft could compete with Red Hat, he would say gleefully, “is by abandoning five billion dollars of annual revenue, which they can’t!” Exactly one year after Benchmark’s investment, Red Hat went public, with its stock priced at $ 14 a share, giving it a nominal value of $ 935 million.

>  At one point in the summer of 1999 the partners were contemplating an initial public offering for Benchmark Capital itself. One argument in favor was offered by Bob Kagle, who thought going public would be “more built-to-last.” Kevin Harvey agreed with him, arguing that a public entity would help to curb what he feared would be a wave of partners “checking out” after completing the next fund. Gurley cast cold water on the proposal to go public, however, by asking, “Is it built to win?” He explained, “GM is built to last, but it’s got so much bureaucracy, it’s not going anywhere.” Maybe “built to last” was not the right criterion to optimize on.

>  Some venture capitalists, like John Doerr, were fond of claiming that their contribution to society took the form of creating thousands of new jobs. The claim was empty bluster, however. Mike Moritz, of Sequoia Capital, peeled back the truth with mordant detachment: “One of the dirty little secrets of the Valley is that all the jobs-creation we like to talk about is probably less than the Big Three automakers have laid off in the last decade. One of the best ways to have a nice Silicon Valley company is to keep your head count as low as possible for as long as possible.”

