---
title: Black Edge
category: reading
permalink: /:categories/:title/
author:  Sheelah Kolhatkar
layout: bookpost
tags:
- hedgefunds
- finance
- sac
- stevecohen
---

>  He was an enigmatic figure, even to those in his own industry, but his average returns of 30 percent a year for twenty years were legendary. What was especially intriguing about him was that his performance wasn’t based on any well-understood strategy, unlike other prominent investors such as George Soros or Paul Tudor Jones; he wasn’t famous for betting on global economic trends or predicting the decline of the housing market. Cohen simply seemed to have an intuitive sense for how markets moved, and he entered the industry at precisely the moment when society reoriented itself to reward that skill above almost all others. He traded in and out of stocks in rapid-fire fashion, dozens of them in a single day. Young traders longed to work for him and rich investors begged to put their money in his hands. By 2012, SAC had become one of the world’s most profitable investment funds, managing $ 15 billion. On Wall Street, “Stevie,” as Cohen was known, was like a god. Word

>  At Gruntal, Aizer had implemented a strategy called “option arbitrage.” There was a precise mathematical relationship dictating how the price of the option should change relative to the price of the underlying stock. Theoretically, in a perfect market, the price of a put option, the price of a call option, and the price at which the stock was trading would be in alignment. Because options were new and communication between markets was sometimes slow, this equation occasionally fell out of line, creating a mismatch between the different prices. By buying and selling the options on one exchange and the stock on another, for example, a clever trader could pocket the difference.

>  Still, Steve was doted upon. His grandmother marked him as the brightest of the eight siblings and referred to him as the “sharpest pencil in the box,” which made him glow with pride. He got good grades without spending a lot of time studying. Cohen’s older brother Gary remembers their mother fixing steak for Steve while the rest of the kids got hot dogs. “I used to complain,” he recalled, “and my mother said, ‘Your brother Steve is going to support us someday.’

>  In between classes, Cohen roamed around the floor of the Philadelphia-Baltimore-Washington stock exchange in a T-shirt, walking up to the traders and annoying them by saying things like: “Hey, your spreads are off.” He started skipping classes to visit the Merrill Lynch offices in Philadelphia, where he could watch the NYSE ticker. “I’d just stand there and stare,” he said. “I could hear the tick tick tick of the tape, and you would watch a stock go by at, say, 50… 50… 50… And then it might go up or down a tick. You could see the trade happening. You could just watch it happen in slow motion. And later, not right away, I found I was pretty good at guessing which way those numbers would go.”

>  Cohen’s golf pro did clerical work. An assistant filled out his trade tickets. His refusal to write his own tickets, which the brokerages needed to reconcile their trades each day, had almost gotten him fired several times before. Why bother with stuff like that when he could be making money trading?

>  Now that he was in charge, his moods and pet peeves became more pronounced. He kept the room at near-arctic temperatures, which he felt helped him think more clearly, and he didn’t adjust it for anyone. His sister Wendy, whom he had hired as a trader, sat shivering in a corner with a portable heater under her desk. One day Cohen stormed in and ripped up all the carpeting in the office because it was distracting him. His group was a collection of strange personalities, mostly drawn from his Wharton or Great Neck past.

>  “I just got ripped off by my wife,” he said, according to a person who was there. “I’m going to make it all back by cutting your payouts.” His employees couldn’t believe what they were hearing. Cohen was taking 60 percent of the group’s profits. Out of that pool he was paying each of them 30 percent on the profits on their own trades, leaving him a full half of the cut on trades he hadn’t even made himself. Many of the traders had worked their way up from clerks’ salaries. Cohen wanted to reduce what they were getting by 5 percentage points. “You can’t do that,” one of the traders said. “Fuck you,” Cohen said. “I’m the boss.”

>  He wanted to have people around him who were comfortable taking risk. He loved hiring guys who were driven and competitive, especially those who’d played college sports. His dream was to have a room full of mini–Steve Cohens, men as fearless as he was. “Tell me some of the riskiest things you’ve ever done in your life,” Cohen would ask his prospective traders. “I want guys who have the confidence to be out there, to be risk-takers.”

>  The way to make money in the stock market, Cohen believed, was by taking intelligent risks. If you had a good investment idea but you were too scared to put a lot of capital behind it, you couldn’t make abundant profits. Cohen figured that 5 percent of his trades accounted for most of the money he made. If he’d only placed those winning trades on a modest scale, those profits would have been considerably smaller. But what came naturally to him was a struggle for most people. It was practically a genetic anomaly, this ability to behave like a reptile while he was trading, as opposed to a human being prone to fear and self-doubt. When he interviewed potential new hires he tried to test for this quality as best he could.

>  Cohen, meanwhile, wanted SAC to keep growing, which required finding new investors as well as salesmen who could help SAC get into IPOs or who could offer investment ideas they couldn’t come up with on their own. He went out for steak dinners, golf and racquetball games. But Cohen didn’t enjoy socializing for business purposes, and he wasn’t good at building the kinds of relationships that would have helped the firm expand. He didn’t really want to be part of the club. He needed to bring in a professional to do it for him.

>  They don’t just buy blocks of IBM to hold for months at a time while playing golf and collecting dividends, they trade. And they don’t just trade. They trade hundreds of stocks a day, hundreds of thousands of shares at a time. They were not interested in a company’s long-term health or whether the new products it had under development would enable it to hire more people in five years. SAC was interested in one thing: short-term movements in the stock price that it could exploit for profit.

>  “What am I going to do with a million dollars?” Cohen said, then paused. “Here’s what I’ll do,” he said, chuckling. “Let’s flip a coin for it.” “What?” Steinberg said. “I’ll flip you for it,” Cohen said. Steinberg was insulted. He knew that his wife would be horrified if she found out that he had flipped a coin in order to buy their house. It was absurd. “No,” he said. Cohen hung up the phone. Then he called his real estate agent, raised his bid to $ 14.8 million, and bought the house with cash.

>  Before his boss could get too excited, Grossman told Cohen that he had three conditions before he would agree to help build the new group: that if the new unit didn’t work out, he would be given a job as a portfolio manager; that he would be paid a percentage of the new unit’s overall performance; and that he would command the same level of authority within SAC as Cohen—specifically, that everyone at SAC had to know that a directive from Grossman was as important as one from Cohen himself. Much to the surprise of many at SAC, Cohen told Grossman to go ahead.

>  While Cohen seemed infatuated with Grossman, most of the people at SAC disliked him. His nickname around the office was “Milhouse,” after Bart Simpson’s nerdy sidekick on The Simpsons—although this Milhouse was a perfectionist who badgered other employees over tiny mistakes or missed opportunities, much the way Cohen did. Grossman knew that he wasn’t liked, and it bothered him. He told the few colleagues with whom he did get along that his “lack of people skills” came from the fact that he’d been picked on in middle school and had suffered through his parents’ traumatic divorce. Still, for whatever reason, he seemed powerless to change the way he treated those working under him. When Grossman walked into a room full of people, they would fall instantly silent. He was soon making more than $ 10 million a year, before he even turned thirty.

>  The art market offered a way to transform wealth into an alluring form of influence and power. “It is not even cool to be a billionaire anymore—there are, like, two hundred of them,” as Loïc Gouzer, a specialist in contemporary art at Christie’s New York, put it. “But, if that same guy buys a painting, suddenly it puts you in a whole circle…. They enter a whole circuit. You are going to meet artists, you are going to meet tech guys. It is the fastest way to become an international name.”

>  Wynn invited his friends to come see the Picasso in his office, before it disappeared forever into Cohen’s mansion in Greenwich. The piece shared a wall with a Matisse and a Renoir. Wynn began to entertain his guests with explications about the eroticism of Le Rêve and how part of Marie-Thérèse’s head actually made the shape of a penis and how the piece had once belonged to the collectors Victor and Sally Ganz, who had accumulated a celebrated art collection in their Manhattan apartment in the 1940s and 1950s. As Wynn spoke, he suddenly backed up and jammed his elbow right through the canvas. There was a “terrible” ripping sound, as Ephron later recalled. The room suddenly got very quiet. “I

>  By the 2000s, after years of regulatory scrutiny, most traders had become more careful about sensitive mergers and acquisitions information. The Michael Milken case had taught traders to avoid buying shares of companies right before takeovers were announced; big price movements in stocks right before takeovers were announced often drew the attention of the SEC. Still, investors were desperate for information that might provide them with an advantage, and they went to a lot of effort to get it. Hedge fund analysts monitored shopping mall parking lots and sent spotters to China to watch trucks driving in and out of factory loading bays, searching for unique insights into how companies were doing.

>  Setting up the right trade anticipating a company’s earnings release became an incredibly profitable strategy, but it only worked if you got good information about the earnings before they were announced. Getting earnings intelligence, then, was what hedge fund traders became focused on. They badgered corporate executives for hints about what might happen. Would

>  The SAC compliance department had set up a special email address for these writeups, steveideas@ sac.com, so that they could keep an eye on what was in there. Martoma used it to push bapi hard. The writeups followed a prescribed format, with the name of the stock at the top, followed by “Target Price”—where the portfolio manager thought the stock might go—and the timing that was suggested for the trade. The most important part of the memo was the “Conviction” rating, a number on a scale of 1 to 10 that conveyed how certain the portfolio manager was about what he was suggesting.

>  They spent an hour and a half going over the slides in detail. Martoma displayed little emotion as he asked dozens of questions. Gilman prattled on: “This would certainly warrant a Phase III trial…. I am very, very optimistic.” Then Martoma made a noise, signaling a change in subject. “Sid,” Martoma said, “my uncle passed away a couple of months ago and I was too busy to go to the funeral. I feel really bad.” He let his voice trail off. His uncle had lived in Ann Arbor, Martoma said, and he was planning a visit to his family. “I’m going to be there on Saturday. Will you be around? I’d like to drop by.” Gilman thought about it for a moment. “Yes, sure, you can drop in,” he said. He would be in his office, working, as he had been nearly every Saturday that he could remember.

>  “Have you already had some lunch?” Gilman said as he led Martoma down the hall to his office. “We could go out and get something.” “No thanks,” Martoma said. “Shall we just sit and chat, then?” Gilman asked. Then, Gilman later recounted, Martoma got straight to the point: “I’d like to see the ICAD slides.”

>  Cohen then wrote out an email to Wayne Holman, his healthcare guru. “I am driving back early today,” he wrote. He explained that he was returning sooner than expected because bad weather was going to prevent him from taking the helicopter later on, as he normally would. “We need to talk on eln, wye,” he wrote, using shorthand for Elan and Wyeth. The next morning, Villhauer arrived at the office early to prepare to execute Cohen’s orders. Cohen had instructed him to find some accounts that weren’t visible to the rest of the firm, so that no one could see the Elan and Wyeth sales taking place. It was an unusual way to sell off a position, not something Villhauer had been asked to do before in his twelve years at SAC. But it wasn’t easy for Cohen to make a big trade without people noticing and without affecting the stock price.

>  “We know you committed insider trading while you were employed at SAC Capital,” Makol began. “We know you’re guilty. But you can help yourself.” Hollander tried to stay calm. He knew what to do in situations like this. At SAC he’d participated in something called Tactical Behavior Assessment training, a strategy for learning how to read people’s body language for signs of deception. Cohen had brought in a group of former CIA operatives to train his staff in the technique, thinking that it might help the firm’s traders and analysts tell when company executives weren’t being forthcoming about things like their earnings or accounting methods. The most critical thing was to appear relaxed. Squirming, Hollander recalled, picking lint off your clothes, or fiddling with your eyeglasses all could signal that you were lying. He tried to avoid saying words like honestly or frankly, which were common signifiers of dishonesty.

>  There was one important and rather obvious factor that the FBI and the U.S. Attorney’s Office failed to consider, however: During the summer months, when the humidity in New York City often reached rainforest levels, everyone of any significance in the financial industry fled to the Hamptons. Traditionally, Wall Street executives’ wives moved out there with their children and domestic staff, while the men commuted back and forth to the city. In July and August, seaplanes and helicopters ferrying billionaires buzzed around the skies of Long Island like drones, and Cohen was often in one of them. He was barely in Greenwich at all during the first month of the government’s wire. Still, there were a few conversations that took place over the phone line that prosecutors used to get permission to extend the wiretap for an additional thirty days.

>  As soon as Bharara took over, lawyers inside and outside the U.S. Attorney’s Office noticed a change in atmosphere. He had an acidic sense of humor that often veered into sarcasm and generated constant press attention. Under Bharara’s most recent predecessors, the office’s outdated media operation did little to bring attention to what the office was doing—and for years, that was how the prosecutors in the office wanted it. The work they did and the cases they prosecuted were supposed to speak for themselves. Bharara took a different approach. He brought in a professional media relations staff and tasked them with publicizing his accomplishments. He held press conferences and gave speeches. Suddenly, questions about how things would play out in the media started to creep into internal discussions about particular cases and how to handle them. In everything he did, Bharara made it clear that he saw himself moving on to bigger things.

>  Ecstatic to hear the news, Martoma wrote an effusive email to Cohen. “I want to THANK YOU again for your decision last week,” it began. “I realize the outcome could have been different. Clearly, there is a long road ahead for me to restore your faith in my process, performance and risk management. I will do everything in my power to bounce back quickly.” He went on to explain that he had “debriefed” the CEO of InterMune, who had explained that the FDA’s decision was tipped in the “negative direction” at the last minute, the result of some sort of unusual intervention by a senior official. “SAC is a special place to me,” Martoma continued. “Having attended graduate and undergraduate programs at Harvard, Stanford and Duke; founded/ sold my own healthcare company; and worked as a Director at the largest federally funded science initiative in the last 3 decades, I have a variety of experiences to compare against my time at SAC. Through it all, it’s clear to me that I am in my element here at SAC…. I want people outside the firm to realize how inspiring this place is.” He went on: “This week’s events were extremely disappointing to me, but I believe they are just a speed bump on my path here. I still have a lot to offer, and am thankful that you are giving me a chance to prove it. Respectfully yours, Mat.”

>  During his eight years on Wall Street, Longueuil had built an extensive network of information sources, including at Apple and Texas Instruments. He seduced them with expensive dinners and golf outings, as well as the occasional night at a strip club. And they, in turn, supplied him with inside information that he had traded on while he was at SAC.

>  Barai pulled information from a wide range of strange characters. One, a consultant named Doug Munro—nickname “10k”—ran a company called World Wide Market Research. Munro maintained an email account under the name JUICYLUCY_XXX@ yahoo.com; in it, Munro would compose emails containing inside information about Cisco and other companies but leave them in the “drafts” folder, where they supposedly would not create an email trail. Barai paid him around $ 8,000 a month, and Freeman paid him, too; in return, both had the password to the email account. Whenever there was something new, Munro sent Barai an email: “Lucy is wet.” Then the men would log in and read whatever was there.

>  Because of Barai’s hearing problems, he made his research analyst, a thirty-eight-year-old named Jason Pflaum, secretly listen in and record almost all of his calls. Pflaum had only a minimal understanding of who Jiau was, but he would eavesdrop and send instant messages to his boss explaining what she was saying so that Barai could keep up with his end of the conversation. Pflaum also took extensive notes so Barai could go back and review the information later, since he usually missed many of the details the first time. “Who are your sources?” Barai had asked Jiau at one point, incredulous. “You should not ask who my sources are,” Jiau replied.

>  The three interrelated groups involved in federal securities investigations—the SEC lawyers, FBI agents, and federal prosecutors—formed a sort of unsteady but codependent triumvirate. Although they often worked together closely and the FBI was technically a subsidiary of the Justice Department, each felt some resentment toward the others, and members of each group wondered whether they were putting in most of the effort and receiving insufficient credit for the cases being filed. The FBI prided itself on being the tough guys who did the dangerous work of flipping witnesses and wiretapping people. FBI agents hated it when people suggested that the SEC ever arrested people, a misunderstanding they had to correct with maddening frequency. The SEC believed, not without reason, that it was the brains behind most securities cases—the only ones who truly understood the complex securities laws. Many SEC attorneys felt underappreciated and sometimes disrespected. The prosecutors, who were drawn heavily from the graduating classes of elite Ivy League law schools, tended to believe that cases weren’t important until they got involved and did all the preparation required to bring them to trial. Preet Bharara’s pattern of announcing new charges at press conferences threw gasoline on the smoldering resentment. He usually thanked his “partners” at the FBI and the SEC, but the optics made clear that he was the one bringing the Wall Street criminals to justice.

>  “The tiny fraction of wrongdoers does not represent the 3,000 honest men and women who have worked at the firm during the past 21 years,” SAC’s public relations handler said in a statement. The last line read: “SAC has never encouraged, promoted or tolerated insider trading.” Bharara couldn’t believe it when he read it. SAC had just signed a guilty plea admitting that it had, in fact, been built on a culture of insider trading. Cohen had admitted as part of the agreement that his company had fostered a culture of securities fraud for over a decade. The chief of Bharara’s securities unit called Cohen’s lawyers and ordered them to retract the statement, which they did. Then they released a new one that stated: “We greatly regret this conduct occurred.”

>  The opening argument was one of Devlin-Brown’s favorite parts of a trial. In a case like this, it was sometimes all that mattered. The U.S. Attorney’s Office had a formula for it, a system that was passed down through generations of prosecutors. It started with what they called “the grab”—a quick, two-minute summary of the case, meant to capture the jury’s attention. The grab could begin in one of two ways. The first was with a big thematic idea, as in, “This is a case about greed.” Devlin-Brown preferred what he called the “It was a dark and stormy night” beginning, which dropped the jurors right into a dramatic scene. Just like in a movie.

>  In what came to be known as the “Newman decision,” the court said that in order for a trader to be prosecuted for trading on material nonpublic information, he or she had to be aware of the benefit the original leaker of the information had received. In many of the insider trading rings, traders got earnings or revenue numbers from other traders, knowing that they originated with someone inside the company and little else. The court also ruled that the benefit the leaker received in exchange for sharing the information had to be something tangible, akin to money. Friendship

